{"conditions":{"rc1":{"status":"review","note":"Affidavit evidence is presented for each claim and linked to the AJ's conclusion, but the AJ's reliance on undisputed predicates (phone use in locker room, argued with supervisors) is not tied to specific cited evidence, and the link between the Sept. 14 seatbelt incident and the suspension letter citing Aug. 30 conduct is unexplained."},"rc2":{"status":"review","note":"Characterizations are mostly attributed to named affiants (Complainant, PM, S1, S2), but only one ROI page citation is given, and assertions such as time-wasting, phone use, and the AJ's 'unrebutted facts' lack identified underlying sources."},"rc3":{"status":"review","note":"Incident dates, the EEO filing date, motion date, and AJ decision date are given, but the sequence of events is muddled (Sept. 14 EP vs. Sept. 22 notice of suspension citing Aug. 30; no start/end of EP or suspension periods; Claim 5 and Sept. 24 incident timing) and no prior discipline history is shown."},"rc4":{"status":"gap","note":"The record does not identify who decided on the suspension or the Sept. 14 and Nov. 1 EPs, what specific criteria or policy thresholds were applied, or whether Complainant's responses (e.g., seatbelt policy per M-41, doctor's note, union requests) were considered before finalization; the Agency's safety guidance conflict is left unresolved."},"rc5":{"status":"gap","note":"An independent reviewer could not assess whether the disciplinary actions were supported by documented evidence without outside context, because decision-makers, criteria, record citations, and consideration of responses are missing or inconsistent."}},"missing":["record_citations","sources","decision_maker","criteria","responses_considered","dates","attributions"],"reason":"The record summarizes affidavits and the AJ's conclusion but gives few ROI citations, does not identify who made the EP and suspension decisions or the policies/thresholds applied, does not document consideration of Complainant's responses (seatbelt policy, medical note, union requests), and leaves the chronology of the suspension and EP periods unclear. A later reviewer could follow the competing accounts but could not reconstruct how and on what documented basis the disciplinary decisions were reached."}