S013-24

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed as a Custodial Worker (Housekeeper), NA-3566/NA-01, at the 86th Force Support Squadron (FSS), Mega Lodging Property, Ramstein Air Base (RAB), Germany. Complainant began working for the Agency in February 1997. He worked as a Housekeeper from 1997 – 1998. From 1998 – 2002 he worked as a mechanic. In 2002, he returned to working as a Housekeeper. On March 15, 2010, while working as a Housekeeper, he suffered an on-the-job injury. The Agency noted Complainant did not return to work after April 14, 2014. Complainant filed a Workers’ Compensation claim which was contested by the Agency. The record contains a March 14, 2016 email from Person A, Human Resource Specialist, Non- Appropriated Fund (NAF) Human Resources Office (HRO), RAB, Germany to Person B, Claims Examiner with Air Force Insurance, Workers’ Compensation Branch, Air Force Services Activity (AFSVA), Lackland Air Force Base (AFB), Texas requesting the status of Complainant’s Workers’ Compensation case. Person A noted that the Agency was trying to remove Complainant from their rolls and needed to get Workers’ Compensation approval first. In a March 17, 2016 email, Person B informed Person A that a settlement agreement was pending, but that he did not know the details. Person B stated that if they would like to remove Complainant from the employment rolls, the request could be sent to him and he would have their legal department review it. On March 29, 2016, the Department of Labor, Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) issued an order approving a negotiated settlement agreement between Complainant and the Agency. As a result of the agreement, Complainant received a lump sum payment and attorney’s fees as settlement of his OWCP claim. In a May 3, 2016 email, Person A sent Person B an “approval request” to remove Complainant from the rolls. In a May 4, 2016 reply, Person B asked Person A to reflect that Person C, AFSVA Attorney, Chief, NAF Personnel Law mentioned that Complainant agreed to resign during settlement proceedings. On May 4, 2016, Complainant sent Person A an email with the subject “Seeking a Part Time Position.” Complainant thanked Person A for inquiring about his future employment and stated he has been waiting for someone at HRO to inquire about his medical condition and employment possibilities with his condition. On May 9, 2016, Person A informed Person B she did not see the agreement to resign in the settlement agreement and asked if it was put into writing. Further, she inquired whether they knew Complainant’s current medical status. On May 9, 2016, Person B told Person A that she did not need to review the settlement agreement to remove Complainant from the rolls. He stated there was nothing in writing because it was discussed during settlement proceedings. Further, he stated “[h]is medical status is most likely the same as it has been over the last few years, but probably worse I would say. I do not have any updated medical information on his case.” On May 10, 2016, Person A emailed Person B and Person C regarding the matter. Person A noted the Workers’ Compensation case was closed and asked if Complainant agreed to resign. She questioned if Complainant stayed, was he disabled and were there any restrictions that applied. Person A also contacted Person D, Attorney-Advisor 86 RAB, regarding the matter. On May 10, 2016, Person D contacted Person C about the settlement agreement. Person D noted it was recommended to HRO that Complainant be removed from the rolls. Person D advised that he is not clear on the authority for the removal and asked whether there was “a disability determination, medical docs, etc…Otherwise, we would presumably call him back to work and determine whether or not he can perform the essential duties, request medical docs, determine accommodation.” On May 10, 2016, Person B emailed Complainant asking him to go to HRO to submit his resignation in accordance with the settlement agreement. On May 17, 2016, Person C informed Person A that Complainant was to resign as part of the agreement. He stated if they did not hear from Complainant within the next two weeks, to process as a verbal resignation. In a May 19, 2016 email, Person D followed up with Person C noting that HRO was informed Complainant should be removed for disability; however, they do not have “any documentation concerning a disability determination, where his physical or mental condition renders him incapable of continuing employment.” Person D noted that Person C informed that Complainant verbally agreed to resign. However, Person D stated that Complainant has contacted HRO asking to come back to work. Person D asked for a copy of the entire settlement agreement and whether there was an actual disability determination or something similar. In a May 19, 2016 response, Person C replied that Complainant “verbally agreed to resign” when the agreement was approved and that this was “not in the agreement.” Person C stated in the response that he attached an independent medical examination of Complainant which he stated showed Complainant was “physically unable to work.” 2 Person C stated that he had contacted Complainant’s attorney so that the attorney could remind Complainant of the agreement to resign. Person C noted that Person D may want to tell Complainant he would have to return the settlement money if he fails to resign as promised. In a June 6, 2016 email, Person A advised Complainant that they were told by AFPC (Air Force Personnel Center) to reach out and “friendly remind” him that as part of the settlement agreement with Workers’ Compensation he agreed to resign and that failure to do so would lead to returning the settlement money. The referenced attachment is not in the record. We note the only independent medical examination in the record is dated May 18, 2015, from an Orthopedist and Trauma Surgeon. On June 9, 2016, Complainant asked Person A if she was advising that he needed to resign first and then later, 86 Services Leadership and NAF HRO will find him a part time position to accommodate his disability. Complainant inquired if he had to search for part time positions only since he wants to remain in a part time status. He noted that he had searched but did not see any part time announcements. On June 13, 2016, Person A sent Complainant a response that he had committed to resign during the settlement process. She stated he had until June 18, 2016, to turn in his resignation. She further advised that, “Just to be clear and [so] no one is confused, 86 FSS is not accommodating your medical condition and we are not ‘assisting’ you to get a part time position. HRO’s responsibility in this situation is to guide you through the application process as for everyone else.” Complainant responded on June 13, 2016, informing Person A he thought she was taking steps to find him a position to accommodate his disability as she, 86 FSS, and AFPC are aware of his medical condition. He stated he was “humbly requesting assistance to find me some type of position I can do because in the past years, this agency has ignored my request to accommodate me.” In a June 27, 2016 email Person D informed Person C that Complainant contacted the base Equal Opportunity (EO) Office alleging that HRO is harassing him because they reminded him to resign. Further, Person D noted that “EO is [sic] indicated that since the resignation is not part of the settlement agreement, it is not enforceable.” Person D stated it appeared Complainant was not going to voluntarily resign. Thus, he stated that they would have to take some kind of affirmative action to terminate his employment. Person D asked whether Person C could do anything at his level. If not, Person D, stated that they would have to process as an oral resignation or as an accommodation request, and if the documentation supports, discharge per disability. In a June 27, 2016 email, Person C told Person D that he just spoke with Complainant’s attorney. Person C stated the attorney will call Complainant and inform him that a resignation was part of the settlement and that Person C will file a motion to cancel the settlement if Complainant does not “resign ASAP.” Person C advised to process as an oral resignation if Complainant does not submit his resignation by next Friday. In a July 12, 2016 email, Person E, Director, NAF HRO, Manpower & Personnel Flight (FSEH) RAB contacted Person F, Human Resources Specialist AFSVA Lackland AFB adding if they had her concurrence on issuing Complainant a letter reminding him that he agreed to resign and seeing if he would resign voluntarily. Person E noted they also received a sick slip from Complainant and were informed that he filed an informal complaint with EO. In a July 13, 2016 email, Person F informed Person E that in coordination with AFSVA, Complainant was supposed to resign as part of the settlement. Thus, Person F stated that Person E was cleared to process him as a resignation immediately. The record contains a NAFI (Non-Appropriated Fund Instrumentality) Notification of Personnel Action processing Complainant’s resignation effective July 28, 2016. The paperwork notes that Complainant verbally agreed to resign during the Workers’ Compensation settlement negotiation process. On August 8, 2016, Complainant filed an EEO complaint, which was subsequently amended. The Agency accepted and investigated the following claims: 1. Was Complainant subjected to discrimination based on age, disability, and harassment when on May 10, 2016, Person A, NAF Services Claims Examiner, sent him a threatening email advising him to resign from his position. 2. Was Complainant discriminated against on the basis of disability (lower back pain) when on June 13, 2016, Person B, FSS/NAF HRO, denied a reasonable accommodation in finding a part position by emailing Complainant, “the 86 FSS is not accommodating your medical condition and we are not assisting you to get a part time position.” 3. Was Complainant discriminated against on the bases of age, disability, and harassment when on multiple dates in June 2016, Person B sent him numerous threatening emails on behalf of the Air Force Personnel Center (AFPC) to either resign or return the money received from a settlement agreement, which was not associated to his workers’ compensation claim. 4. Was Complainant discriminated against on the bases of age, disability, and harassment when: a. On May 10, 2016, 86 FSS/FSPH (Human Resources Office) alleged in accordance with a Workers’ Compensation settlement agreement he would resign from employment, and on August 1, 2016, FSS/FSPH issued him an AF Form 2545, NAFI Notification of Personnel Action (Termination); b. On August 26, 2016, 86 FSS/FSPH denied him a rations card (alcohol, tobacco, and coffee in an overseas environment). c. Was Complainant discriminated against on the bases of age, disability, and harassment when on August 26, 2016, he was issued an out-processing checklist due to the Agency’s termination proceeding. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Ultimately no hearing was held and the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency issued a final decision on March 25, 2020. In its decision, the Agency dismissed claims 3 and 4a for failure to state a claim. 3 Specifically, the Agency stated that these claims concerning his OWCP settlement agreement constituted a collateral attack on the OWCP process. Regarding the remaining claims, the decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. With regard to Complainant’s denial of accommodation claim, the Agency determined Complainant was disabled. However, the Agency found based on the lack of any medical evidence showing that Complainant was qualified to perform the duties of his position or that there was a vacant position for which he was qualified and to which he could have been reassigned, he failed to establish that he was a qualified individual with a disability. Thus, the Agency determined he was not denied a reasonable accommodation. Regarding the claim of harassment, the Agency noted that Complainant belonged to the protected class of age. However, with regard to his disability claim, the Agency noted as explained in the reasonable accommodation claim, he was not found to be a qualified individual with a disability. Regarding the incidents alleged, the Agency stated there was no evidence that any of the actions were motivated by his age. Thus, the Agency determined his harassment claim failed. Complainant filed a brief in support of his appeal on July 6, 2020. The Agency filed a brief in opposition to Complainant’s appeal. Initially, the Agency argues Complainant’s appeal was untimely filed. In addition, the Agency contends its actions were based on the oral settlement agreement the parties entered into whereby Complainant agreed to resign from the Agency in exchange for the Agency’s agreement to settle his workers’ compensation claim. The Agency claims the emails sent to Complainant were not threatening, but reminders of the settlement agreement which he entered into agreeing to resign. The Agency states he was rightfully issued an out-processing checklist based on his oral agreement to resign. The Agency notes that since he was no longer an employee, he was not entitled to receive a rations card. The Agency argues it correctly determined he was not a qualified individual with a disability. Further, the Agency states its dismissal of two claims for failure to state a claim was proper. In its final decision, the Agency reframed the claims and consolidated the harassment claims for analysis. Thus, the harassment claim was renamed as Claim A and included previously listed claims 1, 4b, and 4c. The denial of accommodation claim previously listed as claim 2 was renamed Claim B. Previously identified claim 3 was renamed Claim C and 4a was renamed Claim D.
