S013-29

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

Complainant worked as the Command Support Staff Chief, GS-0343-13, at Hill Air Force Base in Utah. In June 2020, the Deputy Commander, his immediate supervisor (S1), gave Complainant a rating of “1” on his annual performance appraisal for Fiscal Year (FY) 2020. Complainant administratively grieved the “1” rating, and it was changed to a “3” with remarks removed. Additionally, on March 18, 2021, S1 verbally threatened to give Complainant a “1” rating on his FY 2021 performance appraisal during the appraisal meeting; 2. On March 4, 2021, S1 sent Complainant an email requiring him to attend a virtual meeting with the Deputy Commander of another Agency facility without requiring his coworkers to attend that meeting; and 3. On March 12, 2021, S1 requested that Complainant’s medical information be inputted into its timekeeping system. Complainant identified a torn meniscus in his left knee as his medical condition but admitted that his condition was temporary. Investigative Report (IR) 73-74. S1 averred that he was unaware that Complainant had a disability. IR 83, 86. When asked by the EEO Investigator what his previous EEO activity was, Complainant averred that S1 threatened to give him a rating of “1” on his FY2021 performance appraisal because he successfully grieved his FY2020 appraisal to the Commander of the facility. IR 73, 402-20. In an email to Complainant dated August 20, 2020, a Human Resources Specialist informed Complainant that the Commander would work with her office to change his FY 2020 performance appraisal rating to “fully successful.” IR 424. S1 averred that he was unaware of any prior EEO activity by Complainant. IR 86. Incident (1): Complainant averred that S1 gave him a performance appraisal rating of “1” on three of four performance elements on his annual appraisal for FY 2020. IR 74-76. S1 responded that Complainant had not met the performance standards in his performance plan, and that in addition, Complainant was given letters of warning for inappropriate behavior during a teleconference. IR 82, 84-86. The Commander, S1’s immediate supervisor (S2), averred that although he agreed with S1 that Complainant’s performance was deficient, there was not enough documentation to justify a rating of “1.” Consequently, the rating was changed to a “3.” IR 91. Two of Complainant’s colleagues stated that Complainant was neither productive nor helpful and that he did little to create a culture of productivity for his employees. IR 110, 119. Two other colleagues, however, stated that Complainant’s work was professional, ethical, satisfactory, and timely. IR 124, 128. To the extent that Complainant is claiming “Hispanic” as a race, the Commission considers “Hispanic” as a basis of national origin discrimination, not race. Cordell H. v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC [number removed] n. 2 (Feb. 14, 2024). Complainant further alleged that S1 had threatened to give him a “1” performance appraisal rating for FY 2021. He stated that he was not given feedback from S1 about his job performance, nor was he given the opportunity to improve his performance through a Performance Improvement Plan. IR 78-79. S1 characterized Complainant’s assertion as a “completely false statement,” and reiterated that there was no hostile work environment, and that Complainant was being called out for poor performance. IR 82, 87. S2 stated that he agreed with S1’s assessment. He noted that Complainant repeatedly missed assigned deadlines and showed his discontent to his subordinates. S2 further noted that Complainant was a good leader and a hard worker, but that he needed a change. He stated that he worked with the Air Logistics Complex to arrange Complainant’s transfer to the Air Force. IR 91. Incident (2): Complainant claimed that on March 4, 2021, S1 sent him an email ordering him to attend a meeting with the Deputy Commander of another Agency facility but did not require his fellow division chiefs to attend. Complainant asserted that his physician had requested that he telework due to a knee injury. As a result, Complainant stated that he attended the meeting virtually, but that S1 emailed him the next day, telling him that he should have reported to work or requested sick leave. He maintained that S1 did not give him the option of teleworking, and consequently, he took sick leave. Complainant added that S1 emailed him later authorizing telework. IR 76-77. S1 and the Deputy Commander stated that the meeting was a regular and ongoing occurrence and that all of the leadership team, including Complainant, was invited. IR 85, 86, 96-97. Incident (3): Complainant claimed that when he returned to work after visiting the emergency room to have his knee treated, S1 demanded that he include private medical information into the Agency’s timekeeping system in support of his sick leave request. IR 77-78. S1 responded that no medical information was requested and that a policy was in place requiring employees to come into work one day a week, and those who could not come in had to upload a doctor’s note into the time and attendance system. IR 82, 87. The note from Complainant’s physician, dated March 4, 2021, stated: [Complainant] is currently under my medical care and may not return to work at this time. He may telework if that is an option for best recovery. It is my recommendation that he not walk with crutches more than five feet and should not drive. He has further testing on March 16, 2021 and we will reevaluate him at that time. Please make this effective immediately until he is cleared medically to physically return to work. Activity is restricted as follows: light duty, no driving, and may not walk more than 5 feet with crutches. IR 213. In an email to Complainant dated March 12, 2021, S1 asked Complainant to add his doctor’s note that he was not allowed to appear at work in-person one day a week to the timekeeping system. Complainant responded that he would take care of it right away. IR 135- 36, 156-57, 189-90. At the conclusion of the ensuing investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the investigative report (IR) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final agency decision. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued its final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency determined that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination on the alleged bases. Specifically, the Agency found that Complainant failed to show that a similarly situated individual outside of his protected classes was treated more favorably. Further, the Agency found that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of reprisal as there was no evidence that S1 was aware of Complainant’s protected EEO activity prior to the instant complaint. In addition, the Agency noted that Complainant failed to establish a nexus between his protected EEO activity and the alleged adverse treatment. Even assuming that Complainant had established a prima facie case of discrimination and reprisal, the Agency found that Agency management articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. For example, S1 stated that Complainant received a “1” rating on his performance appraisal because he had not met his performance plan however it was changed based on Human Resources providing guidance that Complainant had to be placed on a performance improvement plan prior to the appraisal. Therefore, the rating was changed to fully successful. S1 stated that Complainant was not disciplined for not attending the meeting in person; however, he was counseled for wearing inappropriate attire during the meeting. S1 stated that management instructed all personnel to come in at least one day per week during the COVID-19 pandemic unless they were at high risk. Employees who could not appear at work in-person one day a week were required to provide a doctor’s note, and nothing in Complainant’s physician’s note was considered a violation of confidentiality. S1 noted that two of Complainant’s subordinates were also asked to provide such a note, and Complainant was not singled out for the request. The Agency determined that Complainant failed to show that the Agency management’s reasons for its actions were pretextual. As a result, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that he was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.
