S013-21

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Senior Officer Specialist, Grade GS-8, at the Agency’s Metropolitan Detention Center in Los Angeles, California. According to his answers to EEO interrogatories, on November 17, 2022, Complainant was on duty at his post in the Control Room. His co-worker, CO1, though assigned to the Front Lobby, was in the Control Room to eat dinner. Another co-worker, CO2, who was assigned to the Control Room was also present. When the relief supervisor arrived in the Front Lobby, the relief supervisor found that CO1 was not at his post. CO1 assailed Complainant for failing to warn him about the relief supervisor’s presence. According to Complainant, CO1 said words to the effect that “I should have known not to trust a queer to watch my back.” (Complainant said that CO1 had previously made anti- LGBTQ+ comments to him in the past, but Complainant had ignored these.) CO1 then went to the Front Lobby to assist the relief supervisor with checking- in to the facility. Thereafter, Complainant stated that CO1 came back to the Control Room and CO1 called Complainant “fucking faggot, fucking homo, and gay motherfucker.” According to Complainant, CO2 laughed and repeated CO1’s insults. Complainant stated that he asked CO1 to leave the Control Room, but CO1 refused. Complainant said he called their supervisor, LT1, and reported CO1’s unauthorized presence in the Control Room. LT1 instructed Complainant to send CO1 to his office. Complainant relayed LT1’s message to CO1. Complainant stated that, at this point, CO1 called Complainant a snitch and said: "Meet me on the 7th floor of the parking structure, I'm going to handle you." Complainant claims that, before CO1 left the Control Room, CO1 delivered a karate-chop blow to Complainant’s neck. Complainant described the strike as painful and causing him to step back in order to maintain his balance. Complainant called the supervisor’s office and reported that CO1 had struck him. LT1 then went to the Front Lobby to talk to CO1 while a second supervisor, LT2, came to the Control Room where LT2 observed some redness on Complainant’s neck and took pictures thereof. Complainant said that the supervisors who interviewed him after CO1 had struck him advised Complainant to avoid leaving the facility at the same time as CO1. LT1 reported the matter to his supervisor (CAPT). On the following day, a Threat Assessment Committee was convened to address the matter. Following the Threat Assessment Committee, Complainant claimed that the Agency took no corrective action and noted that CO1 remained in the same position and shift. Complainant stated that he feared CO1 if he returned to work. Complainant accused management of sharing CO1’s anti-LGBTQ+ attitude and of retaliating against him for “rocking the boat” by complaining about discrimination in the workplace. On November 23, 2022, Complainant went to the Los Angeles police to pursue a restraining order against CO1. A Los Angeles police officer contacted CAPT who would not discuss the assault because it was under investigation. Thereafter, the Los Angeles police declined to investigate the Complainant’s report of assault further because it was deemed a matter of federal jurisdiction. Complainant ceased returning to work after November 23, 2022. Complainant filed a workers compensation claim for injuries from the assault that occurred on November 17, 2022. As a part of his request for sick leave, Complainant provided notes from his medical providers excusing his absence from work between November 30, 2022, and January 10, 2023. On December 29, 2022, Complainant initiated contact with the Agency’s EEO Counselor. In an email exchange dated January 2, 2023, Complainant and CAPT discussed covering Complainant’s absence with Continuation of Pay (COP) benefits. Complainant stated his understanding that until his worker's compensation claim had officially been approved, he would not be covered by COP benefits. On January 9, 2023, the Office of Workers Compensation Programs (OWCP) rendered an initial denial of Complainant’s workers’ compensation claim. Following OWCP’s denial, Complainant was paid COP benefits and he uses annual or sick leave to cover his initial absences. On February 9, 2023, CAPT requested Complainant update his status and provide updated medical documentation. CAPT further advised Complainant that he had just 39.5 hours of leave left and, after he exhausted that leave, the Agency would code him as being AWOL. In the evening of March 2, 2023, CAPT emailed Complainant that he had not been in contact with the Agency since January 2, 2023. CAPT stated the Agency had failed to reach Complainant for an update on his status. CAPT informed Complainant that he was being coded as AWOL because he had exhausted his leave. CAPT said that he would request local police conduct a welfare check unless Complainant responded by the next day. In the morning of March 3, 2023, local police from Complainant’s home of residence conducted the welfare check. Complainant complained that he had not seen the CAPT’s message because it was emailed the night before. Complainant further alleged that the local police officers told him that CAPT had stated that Complainant was “psychologically unstable.” On March 27, 2023, April 13, 2023, and May 15, 2023, the Human Resources Manager (HRM) sent letters to Complainant and his medical provider which indicated that Complainant had a medical condition that might affect his ability to safely perform his job. HRM requested clarifying medical information to assess Complainant’s ability to perform his essential duties. HRM asked Complainant to have his medical provider complete a requested medical assessment within fourteen days. On August 3, 2023, OWCP granted Complainant’s appeal of its denial of his workers compensation claim, and OWCP accepted his workers compensation claim for the traumatic injury that he sustained at work on November 17, 2022. As a result, Complainant’s AWOL was recoded to leave without pay (LWOP). On April 10, 2023, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him. The Agency framed Complainant’s claims as follows: 1. The Agency is liable for subjecting Complainant to a hostile work environment based on sexual orientation (bisexual) when, as he alleged, on November 17, 2022, CO1 shouted at him, threatened him, struck him in the throat, and used homophobic slurs, and another co-worker repeated the homophobic slurs and laughed; and In Bostock v. Clayton Cty., the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590 U.S. 644, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020); see also Macy v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC [number removed] (Apr. 20, 2012) (an allegation of discrimination based on gender identity, change of sex, and/or transgender status states a claim of sex discrimination under Title VII because discrimination on this basis is inherently sex-based). 2. Whether, between November 17, 2022, and April 10, 2023, the Agency subjected Complainant to disparate treatment based on reprisal when, as he alleged, management denied him continuation of pay (COP) benefits, coded him as being absent without leave (AWOL), conducted a welfare check, and requested additional medical documentation. At the conclusion of the initial investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency’s initial report of investigation included Complainant’s sworn statement, as discussed above, and those of CAPT and HRM. CAPT stated that following the incident, he reassigned CO2 from the control room because he had allowed CO1’s presence when only CO2 and Complainant were authorized to be there. CAPT further said that CO1 and CO2 were issued letters reminding them to be professional to fellow staff. CAPT surmised that Complainant was not issued a similar letter because he absented himself from work. CAPT testified that the Threat Assessment Committee generated a report which concluded that Complainant’s assault allegation could not be substantiated. CAPT stated that he did remember homophobic slurs being mentioned in the Threat Assessment Committee’s report. He further indicated that the Threat Assessment Committee’s report consisted of memos submitted by the witnesses and notes taken by the officials regarding the witnesses’ live testimony. CAPT stated that the Threat Assessment Committee interviewed Complainant, CO1, CO2, LT1 and LT2. He could not recall whether there were pictures taken after the incident. He said there were no cameras in the Control Center, so there was no video available of the incident. CAPT referred the investigator to Human Resources for documentation from the Threat Assessment Committee. CAPT further explained that health and welfare checks were conducted whenever staff did not come to work and had not called in sick. HRM stated that his subordinate employee who served as Acting HRM convened the Threat Assessment Committee. HRM stated that he had no involvement with the Threat Assessment Committee and that Acting HRM possessed the documentation from the Threat Assessment Committee. HRM denied knowing of Complainant’s EEO activity until September 2023, after the incidents he alleged to be retaliatory had occurred. HRM stated that Complainant was denied COP pay because OWCP initially denied his workers compensation claim. HRM stated that Office of Personnel Management (OPM) rules compelled the Agency to code Complainant as AWOL because he remained absent and had no available leave to cover his absence. Furthermore, HRM stated that although Complainant was coded AWOL, his absence was ultimately recoded to LWOP such that Complainant was never actually charged for being AWOL. HRM stated that the welfare check was standard procedure and that Complainant, rather than being harassed by the local police welfare check, thanked the Agency for checking on him. HRM explained that he had requested medical information from Complainant and his provider because of Complainant’s continued absence and non-responsiveness to communications with the Agency. In a supplemental report of investigation, the Agency included statements from CO1, CO2, LT1 and LT2. CO1 admitted that he was in Control Room on November 17, 2022, and not at his assigned post in the Front Lobby but stated he was there to legitimately discuss appropriate matters with CO2. CO1 stated that he was merely joking with Complainant about "throwing him under the bus" by letting the relief lieutenant into the Front Lobby without giving him warning. CO1 denied knowledge of Complainant’s sexual orientation. CO1 denied saying "queer, fucking faggot, fucking homo, or gay motherfucker" to Complainant. CO1 claimed that he did not make threatening statements against Complainant. When LT1 interviewed him about what transpired on November 17, 2022, he counter-accused Complainant of being the aggressor by barking orders to leave the Control Room and pointing in CO1’s face and chest area. CO1 memorialized his account of the incident in a contemporaneous memorandum to LT1. CO2 claimed that he was unaware of Complainant’s sexual orientation. CO2 said he had been in the restroom and heard Complainant and CO1 yelling on November 17, 2022. He said that by the time he returned to the Control Room, the yelling between CO1 and Complainant had stopped. CO2 denied hearing that CO1 used anti-LGBTQ+ slurs or that he witnessed CO1 hit Complainant in the neck. CO2 disputed that he told Complainant that he did not want to get involved or indicated that he planned to write a false statement saying that he did not see anything. LT1 denied knowledge of Complainant’s sexual orientation. LT1 stated that he had instructed CO1 to report to his office after Complainant had reported that CO1 was refusing to leave the Control Room. LT1 stated Complainant called back and accused CO1 of striking him. LT1 then questioned CO1 in the Front Lobby. LT1 stated that Complainant did not report to him that CO1 had made anti-LGBTQ+ comments. LT1 directed CO1 to document his version of events in a memo. LT2 said that Complainant had called LT1 to report CO1 for not leaving the Control Room. LT2 said he answered the call when Complainant called back to report that he had been struck in the throat by CO1. LT2 said he found CO1 away from his post and instructed him to return to the Front Lobby. LT2 stated that he went to the Control Room where Complainant again told him about CO1 hitting him in the throat. LT2 stated that he observed some redness on Complainant’s neck area and that LT2 took pictures as a result. LT2 denied that Complainant had said anything about being called anti- LGBTQ+ terms. According to LT2, Complainant had only said that he and CO1 had a verbal confrontation that became physical over Complainant asking CO1 to leave the Control Room. LT2 denied knowing Complainant’s sexual orientation. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final Agency decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Regarding Claim 1, the Agency held that because Complainant did not initially report the anti-LGBTQ+ comments prior to his EEO Counselor contact, evidence was insufficient to establish that the harassment was based on Complainant’s sexual orientation. Regarding Claim 2, the Agency determined that Complainant failed to establish retaliatory animus. The final Agency decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
