S013-27

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Supervisory Health System Specialist, GS-0671-12 at the Agency’s Lower Brule Service Unit, Great Plains Area Office, Indian Health Service facility in Lower Brule, South Dakota. In his formal complaint, Complainant stated that on four separate occasions his first-level supervisor, the Chief Executive Officer (the CEO), informed him that a Purchased Referred Care Specialist (E1), Complainant’s subordinate, publicly disparaged Complainant for being gay. According to Complainant, he asked the CEO to send him an incident report so that he could take action against E1 but never received anything from the CEO. Complainant stated that he felt targeted and harassed by E1 since beginning his employment in August 2016. As an example, Complainant stated that on December 11, 2017, E1 followed him to his office and threatened him by saying, “I have the ear of the Area Director and I am going to report your faggot ass and everyone in this clinic for everything that is going on in this clinic.” Complainant alleged that on December 13, 2017, while meeting with E1 in his office, she became very belligerent and said to him, “You’re nothing but a fucking idiot, just cute; go ahead and report me, no one is going to believe you.” Complainant stated that on January 25, 2018, he received an instant message from the Business Officer Manager, advising him that she had overheard E1 on her cell phone telling someone, “If they want to pay me for fighting with a fag all day, then I guess that is what I will do.” Complainant stated that the Business Office Manager indicated that she had been shocked that E1 would make such a statement in front of three federal employees and that E1 consistently made derogatory, insulting remarks about Complainant’s sexual orientation. Complainant reported that sometime in June or July 2018, an employee told him that, during a conversation with E1, E1 had stated, “I hate [Complainant], that fucking faggot!’” On June 27, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of sex (male, sexual orientation) and disability (physical and mental) when, since January 16, 2018, and continuing, the CEO and the Deputy Director, Field Operations subjected Complainant to a hostile work environment when they permitted and/or failed to address such things as: a) Since August 2016, and continuing, E1 subjected Complainant to verbal beratement, insults, defamation, embarrassment, ridicule, name calling (specifically calling Complainant a “fag”), bullying and intimidation without repercussions, which for Complainant, resulted in diminished respect and ability to perform his job duties in a harassment free environment; and b) Since August 2016, and continuing, Complainant has had to endure an intolerable work environment despite his numerous complaints regarding E1’s verbal attacks and unprofessional behavior towards him because management failed to appropriately address his concerns. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. In the final Agency decision (FAD), the Agency determined that E1 engaged in the incidents that occurred between August 2016 and January 2018 because witness statements corroborated Complainant’s testimony. The Agency found that while E1 subjected Complainant to the conduct based on his sexual orientation, E1 did not act based on Complainant’s disability. As for the severity of the conduct, the Agency determined that none of the incidents were physically threatening or humiliating and they did not alter the terms of conditions of Complainant’s employment. Moreover, the Agency noted that only two of the incidents involved E1 engaging directly with Complainant. The Agency went on to explain that because there were nine incidents in a 21-month period, the incidents were not frequent enough to constitute an illegally harassing hostile work environment. As such, the Agency concluded that the incidents, taken as a whole, did not rise to the level of severe or pervasive so as to alter the conditions of Complainant’s employment and did not support a claim of actionable hostile work environment harassment. The Agency went on to find that there was no sufficient basis to hold management liable for E1’s conduct.
