S013-15

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked for the Agency as a FS- 03 Information Programs Supervisor in the Information Processing Center (IPC) at the U.S. Embassy in Brussels, Belgium. During the relevant time period, Complainant’s first-line supervisor was the Information Programs Officer (IPO). Report of Investigation (ROI) at 58. Complainant is female, the IPO is male, and Complainant supervised three direct-hire American employees, who are males. ROI at 59, 101-03. Complainant alleged that she engaged in protected EEO activity when she opposed “the repetitious use of a sexist term to demean and humiliate a female supervisor” and when she contacted an EEO counselor to initiate the instant complaint. ROI at 59-60. According to Complainant, during a January 31, 2020, counseling session, the IPO advised her that, on several occasions since October 2019, two of her subordinates (Subordinate-1 and Subordinate-2) had complained to the IPO about Complainant and the term, “mothering,” to describe their objections to her management style. ROI at 61. Complainant stated that “mothering” was a sexist insult that was specifically targeted at women. Complainant alleged that, during the January 31 counseling session, she objected to the use of the term “mothering,” informing the IPO that it was a sexist term and that she found it extremely offensive. ROI at 65, 78-79. Complainant stated, however, that the IPO told her that he agreed with her subordinates’ complaints and that she needed to change her management style and take management and leadership courses. ROI at 61-62, 65, 77, 80. Complainant stated that, for a four-month period, the IPO tasked her subordinates directly without her knowledge in an attempt to appease their concerns about Complainant and exclude her from supervisory oversight. ROI at 61. Complainant averred that the situation became so bad that she rarely had any idea where her subordinates were or what work they were performing. ROI at 61. According to Complainant, during the January 31 meeting, the IPO directed her not to attempt to resolve the issue with her subordinates unless he was also present. ROI at 61. Complainant averred that she left the meeting emotionally devastated and in tears. ROI at 78. The IPO stated that he met with Complainant on January 31, 2020, after receiving three separate complaints, one from of each of Complainant’s subordinates. ROI at 103. According to the IPO, he referenced the term “mothering” to relay how two of her subordinates characterized her interactions with them. ROI at 103. The IPO averred that he was concerned that Complainant would not accept general feedback and that he decided to share some of the details from the employees’ complaints with her and that, at the time, he felt using the term “mothering” was necessary to convey the concerns of Subordinate-1 and Subordinate-2. ROI at 103, 108. The IPO stated that, in retrospect, he should have paraphrased the complaints of Complainant’s subordinates and substituted the term “micromanagement.” ROI at 103, 108. The IPO averred that he told Complainant that he agreed with her subordinates that her verbal and written communications were detailed and “clinically precise,” that the tone of her messages was sometimes dry, and that her communication style could be perceived as micromanagement. ROI at 109. The IPO denied prohibiting Complainant from resolving the issue directly with her subordinates, stating that he specifically told her to talk to her employees and suggested she use active listening skills and ask open-ended questions. ROI at 105-06. According to the IPO, he did ask Complainant not to let her subordinates know that he had repeated their concerns, since they had approached him in confidence. ROI at 105. The IPO averred that, if Complainant told her subordinates that the IPO had shared their complaints with her, he felt that would lead to confrontation and cause employees to remain silent and not share concerns with him in the future. ROI at 105. The record contains a January 31, 2020 memorandum for the record from the IPO regarding his mid-year counseling session with Complainant. ROI at 118. In the memorandum, the IPO informed Complainant that she was a good supervisor and that he expected that she would do well as an IPO during her onward assignment. ROI at 118. The IPO noted that he had received complaints from Subordinate-1, Subordinate-2 and Complainant’s third American subordinate (Subordinate-3) about Complainant’s “mothering” and “micro-managing” supervisory style and had personally witnessed some of this behavior himself. ROI at 118. The IPO averred that he reviewed emails Complainant sent to Subordinate-1 as examples. ROI at 118. According to the IPO, Complainant noted that her subordinates bypassed her and went directly to the IPO, when they should have come to Complainant instead. ROI at 118. According to the IPO, he and Complainant talked about the emails again and, while the IPO agreed that the emails gave very clear instruction, they could be viewed as “clinically precise and almost cold.” ROI at 119. The IPO stated that Complainant “was visibly upset” at the meeting and seemed to be in denial that there was an issue with her communications. ROI at 119. Shortly thereafter, Subordinate-1 requested to serve as an EEO counselor. ROI at 104. On February 24, 2020, Complainant provided the IPO with a memorandum stating that she could not in good conscience support Subordinate-1’s nomination because the IPO told her that Subordinate-1 had gone behind her back to complain to the IPO that Complainant was “mothering” him. ROI at 120. Complainant noted that she found the term “mothering” to be sexist and indicative of gender bias. ROI at 120. According to Complainant, Subordinate-1’s behavior did not align with the qualities of an effective EEO counselor. ROI at 120. Complainant asked that she be allowed to recuse herself from preparing a statement endorsing Subordinate-1’s request, noting that, if the IPO believed that Subordinate-1 deserved the nomination, she would not object if the IPO provided a statement endorsing his request. ROI at 120. According to the IPO, he discussed Complainant’s memorandum with his supervisor, the Information Management Officer (IMO), and the Deputy Human Resources Officer (HR-1). ROI at 104. The IPO stated that the IMO told him that he would need to have Complainant explain to Subordinate-1 why she did not support his nomination. ROI at 104. The IPO averred that HR-1 advised him that, while the term “mothering” was inappropriate, it did not, on its own “constitute an EEO violation” because he did not believe that it met the “reasonable person standard.” ROI at 104. According to the IPO, he agreed that the term was sexist and asked Complainant to meet with him and Subordinate-1 to discuss it, as well as other events. ROI at 104. On February 25, 2020, Complainant met with the IPO, Subordinate-1, and HR-1. 2 ROI at 61, 80, 106. According to Complainant, she had asked HR-1 to attend the meeting as an unbiased witness. ROI at 79. According to Complainant, Subordinate-1 apologized for using the term “mothering” and said that he was more dissatisfied with the post than with Complainant. ROI at 61. Complainant averred that, when asked why he did not approach Complainant directly, Subordinate-1 said he had a previous negative experience with a female supervisor and chose to approach the IPO first to seek validation and advice on how to proceed. ROI at 61. Complainant stated that, by February 25, 2020, Subordinate-2 had departed the post. ROI at 61. Complainant alleged that, instead of trying to correct the situation, the IPO decided to accommodate Subordinate-1’s insecurity and undermined Complainant’s authority by assigning Subordinate-1 tasks without Complainant’s knowledge. ROI at 61. Complainant stated that the February meeting with HR was the first time that the IPO corrected Subordinate-1’s use of the term, showing that the IPO did not understand that “mothering” was sexist or insensitive. ROI at 80-81. Complainant stated that, while she accepted Subordinate-1’s apology at the meeting, she still had an issue with how the IPO handled everything. ROI at 85. Subordinate-1 stated that, around late October 2019, he had approached the IPO in private about his frustration with Complainant’s style of management and asked for guidance on improving communication. ROI at 195-96. According to Subordinate-1, Complainant would supervise him in a way that made him feel that she had zero confidence in his abilities. ROI at 195. Subordinate-1 denied that he used the term “mothering” to degrade Complainant, and he averred that he subsequently realized that the term could be considered sexist, which is why he apologized profusely at the meeting with the IPO and HR-1. ROI at 195-96. According to the IPO, after the February 25 meeting, he thought the matter had been fully addressed. ROI at 114. The IPO stated that, after the meeting, he had a follow-up meeting with Subordinate-1 in March 2020 at which he told Subordinate-1 that the term “mothering” had no place at work and suggested that he “delete it from his vocabulary.” ROI at 104, 107. HR-1 stated that he did not feel the need to address the use of the term “mothering” because Subordinate-1’s apology to Complainant at the meeting seemed sincere. ROI at 141. The record contains a February 25, 2020 memorandum for the record written by the IPO. ROI at 121-22. According to the IPO, when Complainant provided him the memorandum on February 24 stating that she could not support Subordinate-1’s nomination because of his use of the term “mothering” and that she had not shared this with Subordinate-1, the IPO stated that her objection “could be viewed as retaliation” for Subordinate-1 coming to the IPO, which the IPO said, “he had every right to do.” ROI at 121. According to the IPO, at the February 25 meeting, he thanked Complainant and Subordinate-1 for their candor and willingness to address their concerns openly and stated that, while his door would always be open, moving forward, Subordinate-1 should expect the IPO to ask him if he had spoken with Complainant on operational issues. ROI at 122. The IPO noted that, after the meeting, he met with Complainant and discussed Subordinate-1’s specific use of the term “mothering.” ROI at 122. According to the IPO, he told Complainant that she was right that the term was inappropriate, and that Subordinate-1 needed to hear that feedback again, as it had not been the focus of the discussion between Complainant and Subordinate-1 during the meeting. ROI at 122. The IPO stated that he asked Complainant if she wanted to address that with Subordinate-1, but Complainant responded that she would prefer that the IPO discuss that with him. ROI at 122. The IPO averred that the Agency operates on a hierarchical management structure and stated that there were times where he or his supervisor directly tasked IPC staff to attend to various issues or requests. ROI at 104. The IPO stated that these were not daily occurrences, and, while he denied excluding Complainant from oversight, he acknowledged that sometimes he did not inform her of such assignments after the fact. ROI at 104. According to HR-1, although Complainant did not complain about the IPO assigning work directly to her subordinates, forbidding her to resolve issues with her subordinates, or any harassment, he did remember receiving a phone call from the IPO asking if it was appropriate for him to task subordinates within his section who were supervised by an employee supervised by the IPO. ROI at 139. HR-1 stated that he could not remember the date of the phone call and that he informed the IPO that it was fine to task all subordinate employees within his section when necessary and in the interest of meeting current customer and job demands. ROI at 139. Complainant alleged that the IPO reaching out to HR-1 to ask if he could directly task Complainant’s subordinates showed the IPO’s intention to marginalize her position and justify his behavior. ROI at 83-84. Complainant averred that, in May 2020, with only 60 days remaining before her projected transfer to another post, the IPO increased the workload for her section by making special training requests, project assignments, work requirements, and award nominations with unrealistic deadlines. ROI at 63. According to Complainant, the IPO assigned her all of these tasks shortly after learning that she had contacted an EEO counselor. ROI at 63, 86. Complainant alleged that, while she believed that the IPO was targeting her directly with the increased workload, he increased the workload for the entire section, making it harder to show that he was targeting Complainant. ROI at 60. Complainant stated that this sudden amount of tasking within such a short period was unprecedented. ROI at 63. According to Complainant, her section’s workload did not decrease as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, noting that she was teleworking two and a half days per week but could only perform duties related to performing classified operations while in the office. ROI at 74, 86. The IPO stated that, in May 2020, as a result of maximizing telework since March 13, 2020, the workload was dramatically decreased. ROI at 110-13. The IPO noted that he requested Complainant send the work requirements on May 13, 2020, which was before he was contacted by an EEO counselor on May 14, and that it was an annual requirement that must be completed within 45 days of April 16. ROI at 110-11. The IPO estimated that it would take 20 minutes to draft the work requirements, 20 minutes to enter them into the system, and 20 minutes to discuss them with the employee. ROI at 111. The IPO averred that, although he asked Complainant to prioritize completion of work requirements before working on awards, Complainant refused to do so. ROI at 111. The IPO averred that the IMO initiated the semi-annual request for award nominations on May 15, 2020, with a deadline of May 25, 2020. ROI at 111-12. Regarding awards, the IPO stated that Complainant told him she intended to submit two award nominations and ultimately submitted three nominations, and he estimated it would take two hours to create one award nomination. ROI at 111. According to the IPO, he asked Complainant for input regarding a deadline for completing the distance learning courses based on Complainant’s concern that he was approaching her subordinates directly. ROI at 110. Complainant alleged that, because the IPO’s actions diminished her effectiveness as a supervisor, she requested a transfer to a non-supervisory position in another department to escape the harassment and, on June 15, 2020, she transferred to another department under a new supervisor. ROI at 65. Complainant averred that the IPO not only condoned her subordinates’ use of a sexist term, but also relayed that sex-based opinion to their supervisor, allowing the problem to fester and creating a hostile work environment for her. ROI at 68. Complainant stated that her desk was directly outside the IPO’s office, so she would see the IPO call one of her subordinates into his office and close the door. ROI at 82. According to Complainant, the IPO assigned her subordinates work and the act of closing the door right in front of her was disrespectful and intended to exclude her from overseeing the work of her subordinates. ROI at 82. On May 31, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of sex (female) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, as recently as March 5, 2020, she was subjected to a hostile work environment characterized by, but not limited to, management using the term “mothering” about her and management increasing her workload. On July 5, 2020, the Agency dismissed Complainant’s complaint for failure to state a claim and for untimely EEO counselor contact. Opal V. v. Dep’t of State, EEOC [number removed] (Oct. 8, 2020). At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). On April 19, 2021, Complainant requested the issuance of a final decision by the Agency. In an April 19, 2021 letter accompanying her request for a final decision, Complainant stated that there were omissions from the record that would need to be addressed before a decision could be made. Complainant asserted that Subordinate-2 was a key witness and should have been contacted during the investigation. Based on the EEO counselor’s report, Complainant suggested that Subordinate-3 may have used another sexually demeaning term to complain about her to the IPO and that Subordinate-3 also should have been interviewed. Finally, while Complainant noted that HR-1 correctly stated that she had not complained to him about any issues related to her subordinates or about any harassment, she stated that she did complain to HR-2, who should have been interviewed during the EEO investigation. The record contains April 22-27, 2021, email correspondence between Complainant, her non- attorney representative, and an Agency EEO Specialist about Complainant’s April 19, 2021, letter concerning the omissions from the investigative record. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision on June 3, 2021, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Regarding Complainant’s reprisal allegation, the Agency found that Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to an adverse action because the tasks she was assigned in May 2020 were either routine duties or incidental to her position, should not have taken a long time to complete, and the deadlines were reasonable under the circumstances. The Agency also found that Complainant failed to establish a nexus between her EEO activity and the alleged increase in her workload. The Agency therefore concluded that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of reprisal. Considering Complainant’s harassment claim, the Agency found that Complainant was a member of a protected class. However, the Agency determined that the record was devoid of any harassment directed at Complainant by management because of her sex. The final decision noted that the IPO did not use the term himself and repeated the term as used by Subordinate-1 and Subordinate-2 in complaining about Complainant’s supervisory style. The Agency found that the record demonstrated that the term was only used by the IPO once, that, when Complainant objected to the term in her February 24 memo, the IPO reported it immediately to the IMO and to HR-1, and that Subordinate-1 apologized to Complainant at the meeting. According to the Agency, there was no evidence in the record that Subordinate-1 or Subordinate-2 ever used any other language or engaged in conduct that could be deemed demeaning or disrespectful towards women. Regarding Complainant’s claim that she was excluded from assigning work to her subordinates, the Agency found that there was nothing in the record suggesting that the IPO, as their second-level supervisor, did not have the authority to assign them work. The Agency determined that, because the “mothering” term was only used once by the IPO and Complainant’s other allegations were trivial at best, no reasonable person would consider these actions to constitute a hostile work environment. The Agency determined that there was nothing in the record showing that any alleged actions by the IPO were based on Complainant’s sex, noting that the IPO only used the term “mothering” to describe the complaints from Subordinate-1 or Subordinate-2 and that there was no evidence that the IPO “allowed the use of the term to continue or that no action was taken by management.” Final Agency Decision (FAD) at 26. The Agency further determined that the alleged harassment was insufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment. The Agency cited the IPO, who stated that he was unaware of any change in Complainant’s work performance as a result of the alleged harassment. According to the Agency, even if Complainant could establish that she was subjected to harassment, there was no basis for imputing liability to the Agency. The Agency determined that, after Complainant objected to the use of the term “mothering” on February 24, 2020, the IPO held a meeting the next day. The Agency also noted that mediation was held after Complainant filed her EEO complaint, describing changes that allegedly came about as a result of mediation. FAD at 29. The Agency therefore found that nothing in the record suggested that management ignored Complainant’s claims of harassment. The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. According to Complainant, the Agency’s final decision incorrectly stated that she received a written apology from the IPO. Complainant also argues that the Agency failed to address the serious omissions from the investigative record she raised, which led to an inaccurate final decision. Complainant asserts that the record is clear that the IPO received complaints from Subordinate-1 and Subordinate-2 about her “mothering” them as well as a complaint from Subordinate-3 using similar language, that, for months, the IPO failed to take any corrective action for several months, allowing Complainant’s subordinates to bypass her and creating a hostile work environment, and that the IPO only addressed the issue when HR became involved. The Agency did not submit a statement or brief in response to Complainant’s appeal.
