S013-04

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Census Field Supervisor, AD-0303-00, at the Agency’s Area Census Office (ACO) in Traverse City, Michigan. Complainant is a white Caucasian. The identified responsible management officials (RMOs) were aware of Complainant’s race and color from observation. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 101. Management terminated Complainant’s employment on September 18, 2020. On October 9, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work environment on the bases of race (Caucasian), color (White), and age (unspecified). Complainant’s allegations are stated as follows. 1. Whether management subjected Complainant to harassment and a hostile work environment when: a. On September 19, 2020, Area Manager (RMO 1) accused Complainant of having violated Census policy by using his personal funds to reimburse an employee who traveled 130 miles to attend a training that she was not permitted to attend; b. On September 19, 2020, RMO 1 sent Complainant an email stating he was only permitted at the ACO when the workload called for it and at this time he was not needed at the ACO. If there were items he needed from the ACO, his Chief Financial Manager (CFM) could coordinate a way to get them to him; c. On an unspecified date, an employee from the Information Technology (IT [RMO 2]) office chased Complainant around the office harassingly telling him to "run" after RMO 1 threatened over the speakerphone to call U.S. Marshals on Complainant; d. On September 24, 2020, Administrative Manager (RMO 3) sent Complainant an email stating the U.S. Census was separating him due to his no call, no shows; since September 18, 2020, which it considered job abandonment; and e. On multiple unspecified dates, Complainant’s training sessions were monitored by a witness (Witness 1) from IT, and he was instructed to change his training method for accessing the iPhone; 2. Whether management discriminated against Complainant when on September 18, 2020, Complainant was terminated. The Agency conducted an investigation into the complaint. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), on March 3, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision (FAD) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
