S013-19

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Staff Nurse, Nurse II, Patient Care Services, Outpatient Evaluation Center (OEC), Same Day Unit (SDU) in the Agency’s VA Medical Center in Seattle, Washington. Report of Investigation (ROI), at 83. Complainant also suffered a work-related injury to her shoulder on December 12, 2017, after she tripped over a computer cord. On January 8, 2018, Complainant’s first level supervisor (S1) issued Complainant a leave restriction memorandum, instructing her to provide the Agency with verifying medical documentation in support of any sick leave taken over the ensuing six-month period. ROI, at 106-109. The memorandum noted that from January 2, 2017, through January 1, 2018, Complainant was absent from work 25% of the time and used 263 hours of annual leave and 191 hours of sick leave. Id. On January 23, 2018, Complainant provided S1 with a note from her doctor, writing that she had medical restrictions involving forward reaching movements, such as taking a patient's vital signs or administering an EKG, as a result of the December 12, 2017, workplace injury. Id. at 98. On February 2, 2018, Complainant filed a grievance with the Union regarding the leave restriction memorandum issued to her by S1. Id. at 142, 401. As a result, on February 14, 2018, a grievance meeting was held with S1, an HR employee, and a Union Representative. During the meeting, Complainant read a prepared statement, accusing S1 of retaliation and harassment. Id. at 49, 142. Days later, on February 16, 2018, S1 sent Complainant an email, writing that in order to keep Complainant safe while she recovered from her injuries, she proposed a temporary transitional duty reassignment to the phone room. Id. at 9. S1 explained to Complainant that this temporary position would not require any walking, twisting, turning, bending, lifting, or any direct patient interaction. Id. at 128. Complainant however declined to accept the temporary assignment to the phone room, asserting that many of the duties in the phone room were restricted by her doctor. Complainant therefore requested to stay in the same unit and stated that a transfer was not necessary. Complainant subsequently received an email from S1 on February 22, 2018, which Directed Complainant to report to the Medical Support unit because she was being reassigned to a Medical Support Assistant (MSA) position. Complainant believed that the MSA position conflicted with her medical restrictions and asked that she remain in her current position. Id. at 90. Complainant identified another Nurse who was on light duty but who was not made to transfer to another position by S1. A Nurse Manager also averred that she could not explain why S1 allowed this light duty Nurse to stay in the OEC but chose to reassign Complainant. Id. at 197. The Nurse Manager attested that both S1 and this Nurse performed the same duties, and she believed that S1’s decision to reassign Complainant appeared to be suspicious and unjustified. Id. On February 27, 2018, Complainant went to S1’s office to deliver a doctor’s note, informing S1 that her restrictions were similar to her previous doctor’s note. ROI, at 399-400. Complainant and S1 then began arguing with each other and raising their voices. Id. While Complainant was standing in the doorway, S1 began closing the door on her. Id. When Complainant raised her hand to avoid having the door hit her, Complainant’s hand briefly touched S1’s upper chest. Id. Complainant then contacted the facility to file a police report, but S1 intercepted the police when they arrived falsely accusing Complainant of assault. Id. S1 specifically accused Complainant of grabbing her sweater pulling her towards her and pushing her backwards in one full motion. Id. 2 According to Complainant, immediately after her altercation with S1, she went to Employee Health and was given a release from duty slip saying that she may go home for the rest of the day. After Complainant left work, S1 emailed Complainant writing, in pertinent part, that Complainant was not given permission to leave the unit nor granted authorization of sick leave and would be charged with AWOL for leaving early on February 27, 2018. Id. at 146. On March 5, 2018, the Agency’s automated time and attendance system generated a notice that was forwarded to Complainant's email. The notice wrote that Complainant left work early on February 27, 2018, without supervisory approval, and therefore would be charged with AWOL for the remainder of her shift for that day. The notice further indicated that Complainant took "unauthorized" sick leave on February 28, 2018, and March 1, 2019. On April 27, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to discrimination and harassment on the bases of disability, age, and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when: 1. On January 8, 2018, S1 issued her a leave restriction memorandum; 2. On February 27-28, and March 1, 2018, she was charged with being Absent Without Leave (AWOL); 3. On February 22, 2018, she was reassigned to a Medical Support Assistant position which was outside the scope of her nursing duties and in violation of her physician- imposed work restrictions; and 4. On January 8, 2018, she was subjected to harassment to include, but not limited to the following: S1 told her that she should medically retire and informed her that she may be reassigned from her current duties. On May 14, 2018, the Agency submitted an internal Preliminary Fact-Finding Investigative Report regarding Complainant’s retaliation and harassment allegations against S1. The Report determined, among other things, that S1 falsely accused Complainant of assaulting her on February 27, 2018. Id. at 399-400. The Report also noted that employees were fearful of S1 and afraid of S1 “targeting” them and that a “[m]ajority of staff felt unsafe bringing up issues with [S1] for fear of retribution.” Id. at 400-401. On June 7, 2018, the Agency issued a Notice of Partial Acceptance/Dismissal of Complainant’s complaint. Therein, the Agency accepted claims 2-4 for investigation. The Agency dismissed claim 1 pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107 (a) (4) for raising a matter in a negotiated grievance procedure which permits discrimination complaints. Following the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency subsequently issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The Agency found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on reprisal with regard to claims 2 and 3. In so finding, the Agency noted that Complainant alleged that she was subjected to retaliation for utilizing the grievance process and engaging in whistleblower activities which are not protected EEO activity under Commission regulations. The Agency found that Complainant had not engaged in protected EEO activity until her EEO Counselor contact on March 13, 2018. The Agency therefore noted that claims 2 and 3 could not have been motivated by retaliatory animus, as Complainant’s EEO activity had not yet occurred. With respect to Complainant’s claims based on disability and age, the Agency found that it articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions which Complainant did not establish were pretextual. The Agency specifically noted, with regard to claim 2, that Complainant was threatened with an AWOL charge because she left her duty station without supervisory approval and took sick leave without following the requirements of the sick leave memorandum that she was issued on January 8, 2018. In addressing claim 3, the Agency noted that Complainant was reassigned to the MSA position because she provided S1 with a doctor’s note, indicating that her shoulder injury prevented her from performing rudimentary clinical duties, such as taking a patient's vital signs or administering an EKG.
