S013-16

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by the Agency. Complainant stated that on October 24, 2020, the Manager informed her that the Agency attempted to punish him for too many sexual encounters with foreign women, but that he was “a hero” because he was successful and ultimately won his counter complaint. Complainant noted that there was a witness (“Witness 1”) to this conversation who stated that he was sorry that Complainant had to listen to the Manager’s comments. Complainant reported this conversation to another management official (“Witness 2”). Report of Investigation (ROI) at 124-5, 127. Complainant averred that the Manager seemed infatuated with one of Complainant’s subordinates (“Subordinate”), and he repeatedly asked about her sex life and what she wore. Complainant also recalled a meeting in December 2020, when the Manager belittled the Subordinate and singled her out by questioning her in a demeaning manner. ROI at 128-9, 145. Complainant alleged that Agency officials repeatedly undermined her authority and held her to higher standards, as compared to her male colleagues. For example, the Manager instructed Complainant to stop reporting issues related to concerns that an employee was committing time fraud. Complainant stated that a Senior Human Resources Officer discounted Complainant’s authority by not taking appropriate action when another officer that was under Complainant’s command was threatened. Complainant asserted that the Manager held her to a different standard from her male counterparts because she had to outperform them, while keeping silent on deficiencies. ROI at 131-2, 139. Complainant alleged that she was falsely accused of violating the alcohol policy. On or about May 14, 2021, a Chief of Operations (“Chief”) issued Complainant a Letter of Reprimand for Violation of [Redacted Location] Alcohol Policy. Management officials were notified that Complainant violated the policy twice, on December 3, 2020, and May 5, 2021. Witnesses reported that Complainant was noticeably intoxicated, and she repeatedly stated that others were “fucked.” On the second occasion, Complainant stated that she would “burn this mother fucker” down, and witnesses described Complainant’s behavior as incoherent and aggressive. ROI at 147, 248-9. Complainant was subsequently sent home short-of-tour (SOT) on May 13, 2021. ROI at 151. Complainant declared that after she was issued the Letter of Reprimand, she was unable to access her shared drive to obtain evidence for her EEO complaint. ROI at 157. At the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant was provided a copy of the investigative file and requested a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant initially requested a hearing, but subsequently withdrew her request. The Agency issued a final decision finding that Complainant did not establish discrimination or harassment as alleged. The Agency found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of sex discrimination for claims 9 and 10 because she did not show that a similarly situated employee outside of her protected classes was treated differently, or that a prohibited consideration was a factor for these adverse actions. Management officials testified that there were no other officers who engaged in similar behavior. In addition, the management officials were not aware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity, and Complainant did not show a nexus between her EEO activity and the complained of actions. Even if Complainant could establish a prima facie case of sex discrimination and retaliation, the Agency found that the actions were based on Complainant’s violation of the alcohol policy and unprofessional conduct. The Agency then found that Complainant did not establish pretext for discrimination or retaliation. While Complainant argued that the Manager was often drinking but not similarly disciplined, her assertions were not supported by preponderant evidence. Further, the responsible management official believed that the SOT and reprimand were appropriate because Complainant denied the accusations and did not accept responsibility for her actions, despite the consistent testimony from witnesses about her conduct. The Agency also determined that Complainant did not establish her claims of unlawful harassment. For incidents 1-4, and 6-11, she provided no evidence that the alleged conduct involved her protected classes or were motivated by her sex or retaliation. For event 7, the Medical Provider testified that he did not even see Complainant on May 6, 2021, or within two weeks of that date. Regarding the allegation that she was subjected to sexual comments from the Manager (claim 5), the record showed that Complainant did not raise any concerns or complaints about his alleged inappropriate language until May 14, 2021. In addition, the Agency found that none of the incidents were hostile or abusive in nature, nor would they reasonably deter Complainant or others from making or supporting a charge of discrimination. The Agency concluded that Complainant did not establish discrimination or harassment as alleged.
