S013-18

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Management Analyst, GS-13, at the Agency’s National Servicing Center (NSC) in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Notably, in 2016, Complainant worked at the Agency’s Housing Office in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and requested transfer to Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, to be near her adult daughter for mutual familial support. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, is approximately 1300 miles from Tulsa, Oklahoma. Tulsa, Oklahoma, is approximately 110 miles from Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. 2018, Complainant requested an office transfer, effective September 10, 2018, from Tulsa to Oklahoma City, citing “ongoing stress” caused by a “hostile work environment.” Complainant stated that there was no alternative solution. Subsequently, on June 30, 2018, Complainant requested a transfer from Tulsa back to Philadelphia, citing hardship when her daughter relocated from Oklahoma City to Philadelphia. On October 4, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of disability (high blood pressure and gastrointestinal issues), age (65), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity (witness in 2019 EEO complaint of colleague) when: 1. on June 27, 2018, management delayed Complainant’s hardship transfer request, 2. September 27, 2017 to present, management failed to engage in interactive process or provide reasonable accommodation, 3. May 24, 2018 to present, management failed to address Complainant’s claim of hostile work environment harassment, and 4. on April 1, 2019, management placed Complainant on administrative leave. 3 The Agency accepted Complainant’s complaint for EEO investigation. During the investigation, Complainant stated, due to personal family hardship, she asked to be “out-stationed” to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to perform the same Management Analyst duties. Complainant stated that the Agency delayed processing her request and then, when it approved her request, stated that no vacancies were available. Complainant stated her initial request for transfer was on April 30, 2018. Complainant stated that she has developed hypertension and gastro-intestinal issues due to her stressful work environment and that her requested transfer would help relieve stress by allowing her to be near her family for support. Complainant stated that she made the request as one of hardship and reasonable accommodation. 4 Further, Complainant alleged that a male coworker (C1) treated her poorly and spoke unkindly and unprofessionally to her. Complainant also stated that she was labeled a “troublemaker” in the workplace. Lastly, Complainant stated that she posted a non-threatening animated video on social media and referenced the workplace. The post was circulated in the office and management placed her on administrative leave. Incident (4) was an amendment to Complainant’s October 2018 complaint. Separately, Complainant stated, in December 2017, she requested a replacement ergonomic chair for chronic back pain because her original chair was broken in shipping from Philadelphia to Tulsa in 2016. Complainant stated that she also requested an adjustable work-station. However, in her denial of reasonable accommodation in the instant complaint, the focus is on Complainant’s request for reassignment/transfer. The Tulsa Supervisory Housing Program Director (S1) stated, since January 2018, she is aware that Complainant has chronic back pain and, since May 2018, is aware Complainant has hypertension. Complainant was approved for the hardship transfer program but there was no vacant position into which she wanted to transfer. Management believed that Complainant refashioned her hardship transfer request to one of reasonable accommodation once she learned there was no vacant position for her in Philadelphia. S1 stated that Complainant asked to move to Oklahoma City and then Philadelphia due to a hostile work environment and she informed Complainant that she could not approve a transfer because the work in their office is not done in any other office. Specifically, reverse mortgages are only handled at the Tulsa NSC. S1 stated that Complainant expressed concern about interacting with her coworkers, with one in particular – C1. S1 stated that she sought to help Complainant with alternative options to reduce stress, including adding telework days and relocating C1’s workstation. S1 stated that she placed Complainant on administrative leave due to “concerns of a potential threat to the health and safety of the office.” S1 stated that a Tulsa employee showed her a social media post by Complainant stating, “Me at work next week. Inside joke only for those that [know] me.” S1 stated that the post contained an animated video of a female character pointing her finger as if a gun at a male character who then grabbed his chest and fell backwards in the video. S1 stated that the female character then raised her index finger to her lips. S1 stated that she had to alert and consult the appropriate offices about next steps and placed Complainant on administrative leave. C1, the coworker, stated that he rarely speaks to Complainant outside of work-related issues. Further, C1 stated that Complainant never expressed concern of harassment to him, but she told colleagues she hates him. He stated that the animated video Complainant posted on social media was directed at him. The record shows C1 used to sit near Complainant, but S1 moved his workstation over a couple of aisles away from Complainant. In pertinent part, the investigative record contains a letter from Complainant’s daughter stating that she had to return to her hometown of Philadelphia unexpectedly and she and her mom need each other for support. It also contains an April 30, 2018 letter from Complainant’s doctor stating: [Complainant] recently came to my clinic for follow up of her elevated blood pressure that was recurrent since one month ago. Upon discussion it was clear that a stressful work environment, no ability to transfer to be closer to her daughter and sleeplessness was contributing factors. Home readings have improved since starting St. John’s wort for stress. It is noted that readings are much higher in the pm after work and better in the mornings. After discussion, she will continue with a healthy lifestyle, exercise and take supplements to help with stress but I would ask that you consider allowing her to transfer to Oklahoma City, to be closer to her family and have a less stressful environment at her work place that will help improve her blood pressure readings and further improve her health. At the conclusion of the EEO investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.
