S013-02

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Human Resource (HR) Assistant, GS-5, at the VA Medical Center in Augusta, Georgia, from September 29, 2019 to May 21, 2020, when she involuntarily resigned in lieu of termination. On November 20, 2020, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to hostile workplace discrimination on the bases of national origin (German/American), religion (Christian), color (Fair), disability (Fibromyalgia), and age. In support of her claim, Complainant raised the following allegations: 1. On unspecified dates, Complainant’s first level supervisor, Supervisory Human Resources Specialist (“HR Supervisor”), requested that Complainant sign as the witness on documents she did not witness. 2. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor purportedly threatened Complainant. 3. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor made degrading statements such as “this job is not for you” or “speed it up” when Complainant would ask questions. 4. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor disrespectfully hollered and screamed at Complainant in front of others. 5. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor would not apologize to Complainant. 6. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor did not provide “just” training to Complainant. 7. On an unspecified date, HR Supervisor referred to Complainant as “off the street.” 8. In March 2020, HR Supervisor increased Complainant’s workload. 9. From November 2019 to May 21, 2020, management denied and failed to provide a reasonable accommodation to Complainant. 10. On May 21, 2020, Complainant was terminated during her probationary period. 2 The Agency accepted the claims and conducted an investigation which produced the following evidence. Complainant stated that she applied for the position of HR Assistant under Schedule A eligibility as a disabled employee. Complainant identified her disability as Fibromyalgia, which was diagnosed in 1996. She stated that her disability limits her ability to work out, sit, stand, and walk, lift over a certain amount, and use computers because of the lighting and glare. According to Complainant, she had work restrictions which required her not to lift heavy objects, or to sit, stand, or walk for long periods. Complainant takes Ibuprofen and Tylenol for her medical condition, and these medications sometimes cause swelling, rash, and itching. Complainant stated that she requested an ergonomic chair, footrest, and a screen glare protector. However, she also stated that she did not receive a response from management. Complainant’s doctor stated that Complainant has difficulty with her grip secondary to arthralgias and has difficulty with prolonged standing, sitting, or walking. Complainant’s doctor’s report stated that Complainant had a ten- pound lifting limitation and noted that Complainant suffers from chronic pain. To alleviate her symptoms, Complainant has been prescribed ultracet, tetracycline, and naproxen for her condition. In a letter dated May 16, 2005, Complainant’s doctor opined that Complainant “is not able to perform any kind of work at this time because of the condition and severity of pain and swelling.” Documentation provided by Complainant’s doctor dated June 20, 2005, described Complainant’s restrictions as inability to lift, inability to participate in fine motor movements, hand gripping, repetitive activities, writing, and/or typing. 2 The Agency noted in its final decision that modifications were made to the accepted claims in accordance with the information provided during the investigations. Any additional claims are addressed in our decision in the Analysis section below. With respect to Complainant’s ability to work in the future, Complainant’s doctor stated that this would depend on her progress and her response to treatment over the next three or four months. He recommended that Complainant be evaluated by a pain clinic. Claim 1: On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor requested that Complainant sign as the witness on documents she did not witness. HR Supervisor (Medium Brown, African American, Christian) stated that VA guidelines do not require in-person verification of 1-9 forms or administration of the Oath of Office. According to HR Supervisor, due to procedural changes related to COVID-19, new hires uploaded driver’s licenses, social security cards and passports to the USAStaffing program and then electronically signed l-9 and SF61 forms. HR Assistants were assigned to review the uploaded documents and sign electronically. On a rotating basis, HR Assistants physically attended the new hires’ orientation and compared their documents against what had been uploaded to the system and reported back to the corresponding HR Assistant that the new hire was in possession of the relevant documents. After Complainant told her that she was not certain if co-workers who physically viewed the documents were providing accurate information, HR Supervisor told Complainant that it was her responsibility to complete the onboarding of new hires and ensure all the information was accurate. Claims: 2. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor purportedly threatened Complainant. 3. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor made degrading statements such as “this job is not for you” or “speed it up” when Complainant would ask questions. 4. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor disrespectfully hollered and screamed at Complainant in front of others. 5. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor would not apologize to Complainant. 7. On an unspecified date, HR Supervisor referred to Complainant as “off the street.” HR Supervisor denied telling Complainant that “this job is not for you” or to “speed it up.” She denied refusing to answer Complainant’s questions or hollering and screaming at Complainant on multiple occasions. HR Supervisor recalled elevating her voice on only one occasion when she asked Complainant why a new hire recruitment packet had the same mistakes that she had brought to Complainant’s attention the day before on March 19, 2020, when she met with Complainant to discuss continuing errors, complaints, and work product issues with recruitment files. According to HR Supervisor, Complainant submitted a recruitment packet with duplicate documents, incorrect documents, and non-related information. When she asked Complainant why she presented a package with the same errors that they had discussed, Complainant loudly responded that she was never told to do “that.” HR Supervisor stated that she matched Complainant’s elevated tone and insisted that she did tell Complainant how to organize the recruitment package. Complainant’s voice grew louder; HR Supervisor instructed Complainant to correct the file and HR Supervisor walked away. HR Supervisor stated that her voice was not loudest of the two of them. Complainant did not ask for an apology and HR Supervisor did not offer one. According to HR Supervisor, when multiple people were around, Complainant had a tendency to become loud and contradictory. She stated that all staff were provided feedback on errors at team meetings, not individually, as a reminder that “Time to Hire” errors were critical elements on employees’ performance standards. HR Supervisor explained that most errors were sequence errors, when a Specialist or Assistant performs HR actions out of order. She further explained that an example of a sequence error would be sending a tentative job offer before a SF-52 personnel action is received. HR Supervisor recalled another common error is not following the correct procedure for the verification of background investigation dates for new hires who did not require new background checks. HR Supervisor explained that the phrase “off the street” was used during training to describe when a new hire required a full background investigation. Staff needed to determine the onboarding required for different types of new hires, who might be internal facility transfers, VA transfers, reinstated employees or new federal employees. HR Supervisor denied using this term with respect to Complainant; the term was used to describe new hires who needed a background investigation, if they were off the street, versus a transfer from another agency, who did not need a background investigation. Claim 6: On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor did not provide “just” training to Complainant. HR Supervisor explained that six new HR Assistants were hired for the section supervised by herself and the Lead HR Specialist. Complainant and one of the other supervisor’s selectees were the first of the six to start. The systems in HR have several programs and data bases (EOPF, HRSMART, USASTAFFING) in which access must be approved and training completed before access is given. HR Supervisor stated that she organized formal training to ensure that all the new Assistants received the same training. She created books with instructions, guidelines, and arranged for Senior Assistants to provide demonstrations. According to HR Supervisor, the instruction included hands-on training, visual aids, and tests to measure understanding. The formal training lasted a week. She noted that Complainant received more than adequate training comparable to her peers; Complainant received additional one-on-one training from herself and a Senior Assistant. During employee orientation, Human Resources Information Systems (HRIS) provided Complainant with links to required training. HR Supervisor stated that Complainant was hired on September 29, 2019, and on October 10, 2019, forms verifying Complainant’s need to access certain HR electronic programs and databases were sent to the Human Resources Officer. On October 21, 2019, Complainant reported that she had completed the training and the following day HRIS granted Complainant access to the programs and databases required to perform her job duties. On October 28, 2019, Complainant was instructed to complete eight USAStaffing modules to gain access to the USAStaffing Program. HR Supervisor received Complainant’s completion certificate on November 6, 2019. Claim 8: In March 2020, HR Supervisor increased Complainant’s workload. HR Supervisor stated that she was responsible for assigning work to Complainant. She noted that during this time period, Complainant’s workload increased because she was assigned to Fiscal, Engineering, Pathology and Lab, Prosthetics, IT, Safety, and Volunteer Services, and there was an increase in HR actions for these services as the Medical Director approved vacancies in these services. HR Supervisor identified other HR Assistants with Complainant’s position title, who also experienced an increase in their workload. Claim 9: From November 2019 to May 21, 2020, management denied and failed to provide a reasonable accommodation to Complainant. HR Supervisor stated that she was aware that the Georgia Vocational Rehabilitation Agency was scheduled to conduct an ergonomic assessment, but she never received any medical documentation in reference to Complainant’s medical condition, she had no knowledge of any work limitations, she was not aware that Complainant had requested reasonable accommodation, and she was not aware that Complainant asked for an ergonomic chair, footrest, or a screen glare protector. HR Supervisor recalled that Complainant was working with an outside company to get an ergonomic assessment and that Complainant inquired whether the company could come to the VA to complete the assessment. According to S1, she sent Complainant to Employee Labor Relations to learn whether Complainant’s request was permissible. She did not send Complainant to the Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator (“RA Coordinator”), nor does she recall discussing Complainant’s reasonable accommodation requests with the Assistive Work Technology Team of the Georgia Vocational Rehabilitation Agency. Complainant’s second line supervisor, the Human Resources Officer (“HR Officer,” Black, African American, Methodist), stated that she was not aware of Complainant’s medical condition or impairment, work restrictions, or that she had requested accommodation. She stated that Complainant’s supervisor should have had knowledge of Complainant’s request as she was the Deciding Management Official (DMO) for reasonable accommodation requests. RA Coordinator stated that she was unaware of Complainant’s medical condition or work limitations, she did not have a record of receiving the written confirmation of Complainant’s request for accommodation or any other paperwork requesting accommodation for Complainant, nor did she ever receive medical documentation indicating that Complainant had a disability. She stated that she did not have a conversation around December 2019, January 2020 concerning Complainant’s request for ergonomic equipment. According to RA Coordinator, she did not have any contact with the Georgia Vocational Rehabilitation Agency, and she did not receive the ergonomic assessment and recommendations. She denied telling Complainant that the equipment had been received but then issued to another employee. RA Coordinator stated that due to her lack of knowledge that Complainant was requesting an accommodation, she never proceeded with having an interactive meeting with Complainant and her supervisor to make a decision with regard to a reasonable accommodation, and she did not order the requested equipment. An EEO Specialist and ADR Coordinator, who assists RA Coordinator with accommodation requests stated that there is no record of a reasonable accommodation on file for Complainant. The current RA Coordinator at the Augusta VAMC stated that he has no record of Complainant requesting a reasonable accommodation. Claim 10: On May 21, 2020, Complainant was terminated during her probationary period. On February 25, 2020, HR Supervisor met with Complainant to discuss her performance. HR Supervisor discussed delays in the hiring process because Complainant was unable to distinguish which selectees needed to go through VetPro, needed physicals, and required background checks. Complainant was reminded that onboarding made up at least 80 percent of Complainant’s performance standards and it was Complainant’s responsibility to ensure that onboarding was timely, and that New Hire Packets follow a standard format. With respect to Complainant’s refusal to complete the 1-9 form because she could not be sure that the information that she was given was accurate, Complainant was told that it was her responsibility to ensure that the information was accurate. In a letter dated May 20, 2020, HR Officer notified Complainant that she would be terminated during her probationary period. She was informed that HR Supervisor (the Supervisor of Recruitment and Placement) had recommended that she be terminated from her position because Complainant failed to comprehend the complexity of the work, which resulted in delays in the onboarding and hiring process. After receiving this letter, Complainant elected to involuntarily resign because she could not work with HR Supervisor. At the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant was provided with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request either a final agency decision or a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final agency decision Subsequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to demonstrate that the alleged examples of unwelcome conduct constituted unlawful harassment. Complainant specifically failed to produce preponderant evidence that the alleged incidents were motivated by her membership in a protected class.
