S013-08

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Deputy United States Marshal (DUSM), GS-1811-12, at the Agency’s Southern District of New York in New York, New York. On August 31, 2017, during his GS-13 Competency Assessment Promotional Examination, he was subjected to irregularities in testing procedures and conditions not established under the proctoring criteria. Complainant further asserts that these conditions impaired his ability to focus and test competently and resulted in underperformance on his competency assessment; and 2. On November 2, 2017, he was not selected for multiple merit promotion vacancies. 2 Claim 1 – Irregularities in the Testing Process Complainant averred he was subjected to numerous irregularities when he took the GS-13 Competency Assessment Promotional Examination on August 31, 2017. The Competency Assessment is the examination used to evaluate a candidate’s suitability for promotion to a GS- 1811-13 position. Complainant stated that the assessment guidelines indicate that candidates are to report to the testing site 30 minutes prior to the examination to review the test instructions, however the Proctor (a Supervisory DUSM) sent him a text message the day of the assessment informing him to arrive only 20 minutes in advance. Additionally, Complainant stated the Proctor erred by failing to provide Complainant with the proper testing instructions, which caused him to inadvertently log out of the system. He also performed a pat-down search of Complainant before the assessment started. The Competency Assessment does not have an established requirement that authorizes Proctors to touch or make physical contact with testing candidates. The Proctor was a trained and certified GS-1811-13 Proctor for the Agency. He has been in a leadership position for several years. The Proctor explained that he mistakenly believed that he was to conduct a search for electronic devices, because they were not allowed during the assessment. He stated that he himself had been previously subjected to a similar search for electronic devices when he took a prior assessment that was proctored by an Agency contractor. A week before Complainant’s pat down, the Proctor had patted down two other candidates. One was White and the other Hispanic. Complainant claimed he was not in possession of any prohibited items before or after the search. The pat down of Complainant resulted in the Proctor finding Complainant’s personal cell phone, which Complainant had not previously turned over when asked about electronic devices. Complainant experienced computer issues during the assessment and accidentally exited out of the system. The Agency initially issued a final decision on this complaint in June 2019, but withdrew the decision after determining that this complaint should be subsumed into a class complaint, Fogg, et al v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC No. 570-2016-00501X. In June 2021, the Agency’s Office of General Counsel determined that the complaint involved a different merit promotion process than the one at issue in the class action complaint and the Agency re-issued this final decision. The Proctor contacted the test administrator. Complainant was given the option of continuing with the assessment the same day with additional time or rescheduling to another day. Complainant chose to continue the assessment the same day. He was given the full amount of time to complete the assessment as confirmed by the testing consultant. After taking the assessment, Complainant complained to the Human Resources Division that his test started late. Upon receiving Complainant’s request to retake the test, the Merit Promotion Branch Chief called the testing consultant who reviewed his testing records, and confirmed that Complainant had taken the entire exam for the full amount of time. Complainant complained to the Agency senior leadership regarding the irregularities. He asked to be retested but was denied, because it would have given him an unfair advantage. The Chief DUSM averred that he found out that the Proctor performed pat down searches on all the testing candidates he proctored, in an effort to locate electronic devices. He told the Proctor not to conduct pat down searches in the future. The Assistant Chief DUSM met with Complainant on September 11, 2017, after Complainant submitted a memorandum alleging that he was unfairly harassed prior to his assessment. The Assistant Chief told Complainant that the Proctor should not have patted him down prior to the assessment, but that the Proctor was unaware that he was not supposed to search candidates. Claim 2 – Non-Selections Complainant applied for multiple merit promotion vacancies, but the record showed that Complainant did not apply for two of the 13 vacancy announcements he identified. The record shows that Complainant did make the Best Qualified List for two of the positions: Vacancy Announcement No. MPA 17-317 (Criminal Investigator, GS-1811-13) and Vacancy Announcement No. MPA 17-252 (Supervisory DUSM, GS-1811-13), but he was not selected. Two more qualified candidates were selected. Complainant does not contend that his qualifications were superior to those of the two selected. Regarding the other positions, he did not make the certificate for the multiple vacancies because of his low assessment score. The Branch Chief testified his Merit Promotion Score [of 64.4] fell below the respective score cut-offs. Complainant claimed the irregularities caused him to underperform on the assessment because he had been distracted and humiliated by the Proctor’s actions. In addition, he averred that he was not selected because he filed an EEO complaint. The Branch Chief averred she was unaware of Complainant’s EEO status until she received the interrogatory from the EEO investigator, which occurred after the Best Qualified Lists were created and the selectees’ names announced on November 2, 2017. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. Complainant requested a final agency decision. The Agency issued a final decision finding that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination as alleged. In the decision, the Agency determined that Agency management articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Specifically, the Proctor said he told Complainant to arrive 20 minutes early instead of the 30 minutes stated in the assessment guidelines because the check-in process only takes about five minutes. Further, the Proctor said he conducted a pat down search of Complainant for electronic devices because he believed that was what he was supposed to do. Management acknowledged that the Proctor should not have pat searched any candidates and that they told him to discontinue this procedure after Complainant complained. The Proctor additionally explained that when Complainant experienced computer issues, he contacted the testing company by phone and gave Complainant the option of continuing with the assessment or rescheduling for another day. Complainant voluntarily chose to continue, and he was provided the full amount of time to complete the assessment. Regarding the non-selections, Complainant alleged that when the Career Board announced its selections for multiple supervisory vacancies in November 2017, he was not selected for any positions because of his underperformance on the Competency Assessment Promotional Examination. He claimed that if he had been allowed to take the assessment under the same conditions as others, he would have scored higher and would have had a better chance of making the Best Qualified list for more of the vacancies. The Agency determined that, while the Proctor made errors during the assessment, there was no evidence that the Proctor acted with discriminatory animus. Further, Complainant voluntarily chose to continue with the assessment after being given the opportunity to reschedule. As to the non-selections for the position for which he made the Best Qualified list, the Assistant Chief explained that the selectee for the SDUSM position (Selectee 1) advertised under Vacancy Announcement No. MPA 17-252 had been an Acting SDUSM and Team Leader for four years, which was longer than Complainant had even been a DUSM in the District. Assistant Chief added that Selectee 1 had missed recent promotions “by the skin of his teeth” and possessed proven leadership qualities. Selectee 1 was the candidate recommended by the Career Board Presenter while Complainant was ranked fifth among the Best Qualified candidates. With regard to the Criminal Investigator position announced under Vacancy Announcement No. MPA 17- 317, the Career Board Presenter explained that the selectee (Selectee 2) was serving in a GS-14 capacity and was chosen based on his superior qualifications and leadership experience that far exceeded Complainant’s qualifications and experience. Complainant was ranked seventh among the 12 candidates under consideration. The Agency concluded that the preponderance of the evidence in the record established that the two selectees were better qualified candidates than Complainant for the positions in question. The Agency noted that Complainant admitted that he did not have much experience as a DUSM and that there were candidates better qualified for supervisory positions than him. The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to show that Agency management’s reasons for its actions were pretextual. As a result, the Agency concluded that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.
