S013-17

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as an Engineer, Contracting Support Manager, ND-0854-04, for the Contract Support Management (CSM) Office, Product and System Production Branch (PSPB), Fleet Modernization and Installation Division of the Pacific Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center in San Diego, California. Report of Investigation (ROI), at 6, 17. 2 Complainant transferred to another branch, Code 41250, on March 18, 2018. ROI, at 466-467. She retained the same position in Code 41250. Id. The Branch Supervisor (male, Caucasian) served as Complainant’s first-level supervisor, and the Deputy for Operations was assigned as Complainant’s second-level supervisor. These officials served as Complainant’s supervisors until Complainant voluntarily accepted a transfer to another branch at the same position and grade-level. ROI, at 413. The Deputy of Logistics was assigned as Complainant’s third-level supervisor. Complainant asserted that, on January 11, 2017, the Deputy of Operations included negative, false comments in her mid-year performance review. Complainant asserted that the Deputy of Operations specifically wrote that “her tasks are routine”, “her work is below her pay grade”, and she struggled with both written and oral communication. Id. at 415- 416. The Branch Supervisor believed that the Deputy of Operations’ statement signified her belief that Complainant was not performing at the expected performance level. The Deputy of Logistics attested that it was reported that Complainant performed mostly administrative work, below the ND-4 grade- level, and there were quality concerns with her work. According to the Deputy of Operations, during her mid-year review meeting with Complainant, Complainant said that she wanted to work on her master’s degree and that she was fine with the level of work that she was doing. Id. at 475. Complainant also attested that on June 15, 2017, the Branch Supervisor stated in a meeting with her that Complainant’s “job is too easy”, “there are other tasks more suited to [her] skill”, and her job was overpaid. Id. at 419. In response, the Branch Supervisor averred that he asked Complainant why someone at her grade level was performing data entry work, which was work usually assigned to lower graded employees. Id. at 449. The page numbers refer to the Bates stamp numbers on the bottom right of each page. The Branch Supervisor also averred that he told Complainant it would be difficult to justify any significant pay increases based on her level of work. Id. On September 11, 2017, Complainant learned that she was given a very low performance rating for the period ending on June 30, 2017, which caused her not to receive a salary increase or a bonus for the rating period. Id. at 422-423. Complainant’s expected performance rating for her position was a 5.1. However, the Branch Supervisor rated Complainant at the “insufficient” 4.0 level. Id. at 450. Deputy of Operations explained that individuals must reach expected performance levels. However, as Complainant was rated below expected, in Zone 4, she was not eligible for a performance payout. Id. at 478. Thereafter, on October 17, 2017, Complainant was placed on a Performance Development Assessment (PDA). Complainant was told that the PDA was an initial step that could eventually lead to her being placed on a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP). Id. at 425. Branch Supervisor explained any employee who receives a rating below the employee’s expected score (i.e. Complainant’s 4.0 instead of 5.1) receives a PDA to help bring the employee back to an acceptable performance level. Branch Supervisor sent the PDA to Complainant on October 18, 2017, noting that a PDA is a tool to help her improve performance in areas he believed she performed unsatisfactorily. Branch Supervisor explained that Complainant had problems communicating with her project manager, and filling out the data for the Purchase Requests (PRs). Moreover, when data was missing, she would stop working instead of locating critical data. Id. at 451. Additionally, Branch Supervisor found that Complainant had difficulty managing her tasks and priorities, and she demonstrated issues working with others. Id. The Branch Supervisor explained that Complainant was issued the PDA as a tool to help her improve her performance. Id. at 452. Thereafter, on October 18, 2017, Complainant asserted the Branch Supervisor asked her to train her co-worker, Engineer, ND-0855-04, (CW1) (male, Caucasian) to replace her. Id. at 427-428. The Deputy of Operations acknowledged that Complainant was asked to train CW1 for approximately two months and explained that this action was in anticipation of Complainant’s requested transfer. Id. at 480. Complainant alleged, moreover, that on October 23, 2017, the Branch Supervisor told her she had failed her PDA when she neglected to inform him of her workload. Id. at 428-429. However, Complainant maintained that she had emailed the required documents by the due date, but technical issues prevented the Branch Supervisor from receiving her email. Id. The Branch Supervisor responded that Complainant only failed one element of her PDA, which was not a failure of the entire PDA. Id. at 453. On October 26, 2017, the Branch Supervisor stated the Division Head ordered him to stop all actions with regard to the PDAs of Complainant and another employee. Id. at 454. The Division Head advised execution of PDAs at the time were suspended until all employee relations matters were resolved. Id. at 521. In addition, Complainant maintained that the Branch Supervisor completed a negative supervisory assessment of her performance on February 15, 2018, for her mid-year performance review. Id. at 46-47. Therein, the Branch Supervisor wrote, among other things, that Complainant’s PRs were missing information and documentation. Id. The Branch Supervisor noted that these errors by Complainant resulted in returned PRs, which caused a thorough review of all her PRs prior to releasing them into the workflow. Id. On March 18, 2018, Complainant transferred to the Afloat Networks Branch within CSM, but she retained the same salary and grade-level under ND- 0854-04. Id. at 197. Complainant asserted that, on June 13, 2018, she learned that a male co- worker, Engineer, ND-0855-04, (CW2) (male, Vietnamese) had less difficult requirements in his PDA. Id. at 432. Branch Supervisor responded, however, that the difference between the PDA of Complainant’s and the PDA of CW2, was that Complainant was expected to improve her communication skills. Id. at 454. He explained that he placed CW2 on a PDA because, like Complainant, he received a rating lower than the expected performance rating for his position. CW2 expected to receive a rating of 9. Instead, he received a 7. Complainant further alleged that her male co-workers, CW1 and CW2, earned a higher salary than she did for performing the same CSM work. Specifically, Complainant attested that CW1 and CW2 received the same assignments and task orders, which were all equally difficult and important. Complainant stated that CW1 and CW2’s CSM duties required the same degree of responsibility as her duties and they all worked under the same conditions. Complainant’s annual salary, as of April 5, 2018, was $81,388, while both CW1’s and CW2’s annual salary was $98,317. Id. at 160-163, 168, 173. According to Complainant, CW2 reached the top of the pay band for the Engineer position in 2006, after 16 years in federal service. In comparison, she had been in federal service for 17 years and still had not reached the top level of the Engineer relevant pay band. Complainant believed that she was more qualified to be paid at the top of the pay band than her male counterparts, as she had previously held several high positions including the following positions: Project Engineer, Project Lead, System Engineering Lead, Project Manager, and Assistant Program Manager. Id. Additionally, Complainant noted that a third male Engineer (CW3), who took over her position after her transfer in March 2018, was also paid a higher salary. Complainant maintained that CW3 started in federal service in 2001, which was only one year before she started. Id. On September 3, 2018, Complainant filed the instant formal EEO complaint, as revised on September 4, 2018. Therein, Complainant claimed that the Agency subjected her to discrimination and harassment based on race (Asian), national origin (Vietnamese), and sex (female) when: 1. On January 11, 2017, she received an untrue negative mid- year review, and therein the Deputy of Operations wrote that her “job is routine and way below the ND-04 level”; 2. On June 15, 2017, the Branch Supervisor stated that her job was “too easy,” suggested that she get another job, and said her salary would never increase; 3. On September 11, 2017, she learned that she was given a very low performance rating for the rating period ending on June 30, 2017, which caused her not to receive a salary increase or a bonus for that rating period; 4. On October 17, 2017, she was placed on a Performance Development Assessment (PDA) based on untrue negative assessments, with the purpose to fire her; 5. On October 18, 2017, the Branch Supervisor asked her to train her co-worker, Engineer, ND-04, (CW1) (male, Caucasian) to replace her; 6. On October 23, 2017, the Branch Supervisor stated that she failed her PDA, without providing an appropriate reason; 7. On February 15, 2018, she received a negative mid-year review without proof, even though she provided evidence of her excellent performance; 8. On June 13, 2018, she learned that a male co-worker, Engineer, ND-04, (CW2) (male, Vietnamese) had less difficult requirements in his PDA; 9. On August 22, 2018, she learned that Branch Supervisor had never suggested that CW2 leave his job, or suggested his job was “too easy.” 10. On April 5, 2018, she learned that her male co-worker, CW1, was paid a higher salary to do the same work; and 11. On June 13, 2018, she learned that another male co- worker, CW2, was paid a higher salary to do the same work. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), finding no discrimination. The Agency specifically found that Complainant did not establish that she was subjected to a hostile work environment based on her protected classes. In so finding, the Agency noted that Complainant failed to show that the Agency was motivated by discriminatory animus based on her protected classes. The Agency further found that Complainant did not show that the alleged incidents were severe or pervasive enough to rise to the level of a hostile work environment. The Agency found, however, that Complainant established regarding claims 10 and 11, a prima facie case of sex-based pay discrimination under the Equal Pay Act (EPA). Specifically, the Agency found that Complainant received a lower salary than both CW1 and CW2. The Agency noted that Complainant’s annual salary was $81,388, while the annual salary for CW1 and CW2 was $98,317. The Agency found that the Branch Supervisor believed that Complainant, CW1, and CW2 performed substantially the same job functions and duties, noting they took turns performing the same role within the same system. The Agency noted that management requested that Complainant train CW1 to enable him to replace her once she transferred from the PSPB. Additionally, the Agency noted that the Branch Supervisor agreed that Complainant performed the same tasks as CW1 and CW2. The Agency found that Complainant’s education and experience were comparable to both CW1 and CW2. The Branch Supervisor also verified that Complainant possessed the same skills as CW1 and CW2. The Agency determined that Complainant, CW1, and CW2 all performed the same work for the same office, and that Complainant’s position included the same responsibilities as CW1’s and CW2’s position. The Agency found that Complainant established a prima facie case of sex- based pay discrimination under the EPA. The Agency, however, nevertheless determined that it met its burden in showing that the pay difference was based on a factor other than sex. Specifically, the Agency reasoned that CW1 had already attained the full-performance level of ND-04 and assumed the trainee position to back-fill for Complainant who was in the middle of the ND-04 paygrade performance level. According to the Agency, when CW1 was identified as Complainant’s replacement, he had already achieved his full performance level in ND-04. The Agency therefore reasoned that the pay difference was the result of intra-agency cooperation to fill Complainant’s position. The Agency noted that the situation would have been the same if Complainant’s back-fill had been a female employee who had already attained the full performance level. Regarding CW2’s salary, the Agency noted that CW2 had been a federal employee since 1990, while Complainant had only been a federal employee since 2002. The Agency justified CW2’s higher salary at that time to his having over a decade more time in federal service than Complainant. The Agency stated that CW2 reached the full performance level of the paygrade in 2006, while Complainant was still in the middle of the performance level for the ND-04 paygrade. Therefore, the Agency determined that the pay difference was not due to sex but was the result of CW2’s relative time in federal service.
