S013-26

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Readjustment Counselor, GS-0101-11, at the Agency’s VA Readjustment Counseling Service facility in Wasilla, Alaska. Complainant is a lesbian. Complainant’s first-line supervisor was a Team Leader (S1, heterosexual), and her second-line supervisor was the Deputy Regional Manager for Region 4A (S2, heterosexual). S1 hired Complainant in October 2014. Complainant did not live in Alaska when she was hired. A Clinical Psychologist (C1, heterosexual) stated that she reached out to Complainant after she was hired and helped her find a place to live before moving to Alaska. Complainant subsequently moved to Alaska, and she began working at the Wasilla facility on January 25, 2015. According to Complainant, she was assigned to participate in outreach activities in Sitka, Alaska, in late February 2015, with C1 and the Outreach Coordinator (C2, heterosexual). Complainant alleged that, after returning from the trip to Sitka, S1 told her that C1 and C2 were supposed to allow her to shadow them in Sitka but that he heard that they had “ditched” her at the Sitka Job Center while they did outreach. The Office Manager (C3, heterosexual) averred that, when C1 heard that Complainant was going to Sitka, she said she would need a larger rental car because she did not want to sit next to Complainant. Complainant averred that at a March 16, 2015, staff meeting she asked C1 why she had been ditched at the Sitka Job Center and that C1 and C2 responded that they had not realized that Complainant was supposed to shadow them. C1 stated that S1 asked her to include Complainant on the trip to Sitka but that he told her to stay at the Sitka Job Center. According to C1, at the meeting Complainant accused her and C2 of sightseeing while Complainant was at the Job Center, which would constitute fraud against the federal government. Complainant stated that on March 17 or 18, 2015, S1 told Complainant that C1 stated that she had hired a lawyer and was investigating suing Complainant for slander for insinuating that C1 was not truthful. C1 denied telling S1 that she hired a lawyer. S1 stated that C1 told him that she had checked with her lawyer and that Complainant’s comments were slanderous. C2 averred that he heard C1 say that Complainant’s comments were slanderous but that he did not remember C1 saying that she was going to sue Complainant. Complainant averred that on April 8, 2015, S1 told her during a meeting that he already knew that she was a lesbian. S1 stated that Complainant said that she had something to tell him and that he responded that he already knew what she was going to say, that she was a lesbian. According to Complainant, S1 said that, after Complainant had been hired, C1 had “Googled” Complainant and found a September 22, 2002, letter to the editor of a local newspaper in which Complainant identified herself as a member of the LGBT community. Complainant alleged that S1 informed her that, in the fall of 2014, C1 showed him the letter to the editor and said that “he didn’t know what he was doing by hiring [Complainant]” because “Wasilla is not ready for this.” Complainant also alleged that C1 told S1 that Complainant “would be better off working at the Fairbanks Vet Center, where there are more gays and lesbians.” C1 stated that, in November 2014, S1 had asked her to investigate Complainant’s background and that she found the letter to the editor, which she showed to S1. According to C1, after looking at the letter to the editor, S1 said, “Oh my gosh, I’ve hired a gay employee.” C1 denied showing the letter to anyone other than S1 and denied stating that “Wasilla is not ready for this.” C1 also denied telling S1 that he should not have hired Complainant and denied suggesting that Complainant would be better off working in Fairbanks. S1 denied asking C1 to investigate Complainant and stated that C1 showed the letter to the editor to him, C2, and C3. S1 averred that C1 told him that it was a mistake to hire Complainant and that she should work in Fairbanks because there were more gay people there. S1 stated that he did not remember C1 saying that “Wasilla is not ready for this.” C3 stated that when C1 showed her, S1, and C2 the letter to the editor she told S1, “Look what you did,” and said, “The Valley is not ready for this.” C2 stated that C1 came to his office to show him Complainant’s letter to the editor. Complainant stated that, on April 13, 2015, she asked S1 if they could meet with C1 to discuss their conflict but that S1 stated that it would only “make things worse” and that he had not done anything about C1’s comments because he did not want to lose his job. S1 denied saying that he was afraid of losing his job, but he stated that he was not willing to confront C1 because he feared that she would retaliate against him. Complainant averred that S1 subsequently told her that, on April 13, 2015, C1 told S1 that Complainant “had a sense of entitlement” and was going to “play the gay card.” C1 denied making these statements. S1 stated that C1 said, “These people have a sense of entitlement.” According to Complainant, on April 16, 2015, she reported C1’s comments to the Regional Manager (S3, sexual orientation unknown), and, on April 29, 2015, she reported C1’s comments to S2. An Anchorage Veterans Center Team Leader (S4, declined to provide his sexual orientation) averred that, in April 2015, S3 asked him to conduct a fact-finding mission in Wasilla “to determine why things had become dysfunctional.” S4 averred that, although the focus of the fact-finding was not C1’s comments, Complainant and S1 both reported during the fact-finding that C1 had researched Complainant and made comments about her sexual orientation. According to S4, after the fact-finding, he told S1 to “focus back on the mission” and the productivity of the team. Complainant stated that in May 2015 the Associate Regional Manager (S5, heterosexual) came to Wasilla and that she reported C1’s harassment to him during that visit. According to S5, he was in Wasilla on June 18 and 19, 2015, for a regularly scheduled site visit, and that Complainant told him during the site visit that she was being harassed by C1 because of her sexual orientation. S5 stated that he reported Complainant’s concerns to S2. Complainant averred that she discussed the possibility of a transfer with S2 to get out of the hostile work environment and that she was subsequently transferred to the Kenai, Alaska Veterans Center on July 29, 2015. S2 stated that when Complainant filed an EEO complaint, he stopped investigating the alleged harassment because the matter would be investigated by an EEO Investigator and he decided to delay disciplining C1 until a determination was made on the merits of Complainant’s EEO complaint. Procedural History On May 21, 2015, Complainant initiated contact with an EEO Counselor. On June 15, 2015, the EEO Counselor sent Complainant a letter closing the informal EEO counseling process and a copy of Notice of the Right to File a Discrimination Complaint. The EEO Counselor described Complainant’s complaint as a harassment/hostile work environment claim based on sexual orientation and listed the dates of occurrence as January 2015, February 2015, and April 8, 2015. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 43. On June 23, 2015, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment based on sex (sexual orientation). The Agency accepted Complainant’s claim that she was subjected to harassment on the basis of sexual orientation, including when: 1. On March 17, 2015, C1 threatened to sue Complainant for slander when Complainant asked why C1 had not included her in outreach activities in Sitka; 2. On April 8, 2015, S1 told Complainant that he already knew that she was lesbian because C1 had looked up Complainant online when she was hired in October 2014, and showed S1 and other coworkers the letter to the editor in which Complainant identified herself as a member of the LGBTQ community; 3. On April 8, 2015, Complainant learned that C1 said that Complainant should work in Fairbanks because there were more gay people there; 4. On April 13, 2015, S1 told Complainant that he did not do anything about C1’s “Fairbanks comments” because he was afraid to lose his job; 5. On April 13, 2015, Complainant learned that C1 said that she had a “sense of entitlement” and could not “play the gay card”; and 6. On May 19, 2015, C3 told Complainant that she had heard C1 say that “Wasilla [was] not ready for this,” referring to Complainant’s sexual orientation, and state that S1 “should not have hired [Complainant].” At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Therein, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that it had subjected her to discrimination as alleged. In the final decision, the Agency found that the preponderance of the evidence in the record established that C1 did perform a background check on Complainant and made negative comments about her sexual orientation, which Complainant learned about in April and May 2015. Specifically, the Agency determined that, upon finding the letter to the editor in which Complainant identified her sexual orientation, C1 shared the letter with S1 and her coworkers and told S1 that he made a mistake in hiring Complainant and that either Wasilla or “the Valley” was not ready for Complainant because she was a lesbian. The Agency also found that the preponderance of the evidence established that, during the outreach trip to Sitka, C1 inexplicably refused to include Complainant in the outreach activities and that, when Complainant complained about being left behind in Sitka, C1 accused Complainant of slander. The Agency did not find that preponderant evidence established that C1 threatened to sue Complainant or that C1 said that Complainant should work in Fairbanks because there were more gay people there, that gay people have a sense of entitlement, or that Complainant was playing the gay card. In determining whether Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment, the Agency noted that, although C1’s comments clearly related to Complainant’s sexual orientation, they were not made in front of Complainant and only occurred on a few occasions. The Agency stated that hostile work environments based on sexual orientation tend to include vulgar, sex-based epithets and threatening or demeaning conduct to be considered severe or pervasive. The Agency therefore found that the alleged harassment was insufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment. The Agency continued its final decision by assuming arguendo that Complainant established a hostile work environment and considering whether the Agency took prompt, appropriate, and effective remedial action as soon as it became aware of the alleged harassment. The Agency stated that S1 learned about the harassment on April 8, 2015, and that S2 learned about the harassment in April or May of 2015. The Agency found that several officials visiting Wasilla conducted some sort of investigation, although S2 discontinued these investigations when Complainant filed an EEO complaint. In a footnote, the Agency cited Lulverne v. Dep’t of Health and Human Serv., EEOC [number removed] (Oct. 1, 1998) for the proposition that an agency’s obligation to take prompt, appropriate action in response to allegations of harassment is independent of the EEO process. Nonetheless, the Agency concluded that it took immediate, appropriate, and effective action by investigating Complainant’s allegations and by transferring her to Kenai at her request.
