S013-20

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail Handler at the Agency’s Los Angeles Processing and Distribution Center (LAP&DC) in Los Angeles, California. Report of Investigation (ROI), at 64. According to Complainant, he reported to his first-level supervisor (S1), the Acting Lead Manager, the Lead Manager, and the Plant Manager that his coworker (C1) had been subjecting him to a hostile work environment since March 2017. ROI at 8-11. Complainant specifically maintained that he reported to management that C1 had been falsely telling employees throughout the Agency that he was a child molester. Id. Complainant maintained that several employees approached him, saying that C1 had been spreading a rumor to employees that he was a child molester. Id. Complainant asserted that C1 began to slander him after he rebuffed her sexual advances. Id. Complainant averred that management failed to address his allegation of harassment, and therefore C1 was continuously allowed to spread the false rumors about him. Id. Complainant maintained that management did not conduct an investigation into the matter, and C1 was not removed from his work unit in accordance with the Agency’s anti-harassment policy. Id. S1 stated that Complainant presented “a PS-13 of alleged allegations to [her] in the month of October 2018,” which she then forwarded to the Lead Manager. Id. at 116. The Lead Manager attested that both parties were separated to address the issue. Id. at 130. However, the Lead Manager attested that Complainant did not report to her that C1 had been spreading the rumors about him being a child molester. Id. Complainant also averred that he was subjected to an investigative interview on August 7, 2018, for absences he acquired due to his Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. Id. at 8-11. Complainant maintained that management improperly discussed his private personal information and medical information with coworkers, including C1. On November 16, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work environment on the basis of sex (male) when: 1. Since March 2017, he has been sexually harassed by a coworker and despite reporting the harassment to management, they have failed to take appropriate steps to investigate and/or end the sexual harassment; 2. On August 7, 2018, he was subjected to an investigative interview; and 3. On unspecified dates, management discussed his private personal and medical information with coworkers, including the individual he had reported had sexually harassed him. Following the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing, but the AJ denied the hearing request on that grounds that Complainant failed to provide an executed affidavit for the record in accordance with his orders. Specifically, on September 12, 2019, the AJ issued a Show Cause Order for Complainant to explain why he did not provide an affidavit for ROI and ordered Complainant to provide an executed affidavit by September 16, 2019. After Complainant did not respond to the Agency’s Motion to Dismiss for the failure to provide the affidavit, the AJ issued an order dismissing Complainant’s hearing request. The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. In so finding, the Agency observed that there were no corroborating statements or evidence supporting Complainant’s allegations of harassment by C1. The Agency noted that Complainant and C1 lived together at or near the time of Complainant’s allegations, and Complainant did not identify how C1 propositioned him for sex. The Agency also noted that Complainant did not indicate when or how often C1 allegedly spread the rumor about him molesting children. The Agency further noted that Complainant did not identify the private or medical evidence allegedly discussed with others or the contexts in which those discussions allegedly occurred. The Agency found that Complainant’s minimally described allegations were neither severe nor pervasive enough to establish a hostile work environment. The Agency observed that Complainant failed to provide an affidavit for the record as ordered by the AJ, and therefore there was not enough information regarding Complainant’s claim of a hostile work environment. The Agency nevertheless found that management took whatever action it could to address Complainant’s allegations based on the minimal information available.
