S013-06

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

Procedural Background At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Information Technology Specialist, GS-2210-12, at the Agency’s Division of Management Services (DMS), Office of Information Technology (OIT), National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), National Institutes of Health (NIH) facility in Bethesda, Maryland. On December 27, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against Complainant on the bases of race (White), national origin (Hispanic), sex (male), disability (physical), and retaliation (unspecified) when: 1. On August 1, 2018, Complainant received an email stating that he would not receive a midyear performance review due to his ongoing medical condition. 2. On August 9, 2018, management denied Complainant’s request to telework as a reasonable accommodation (RA). Although Complainant clearly alleged retaliation in EEO counseling and his formal complaint, the Agency did not mention reprisal or retaliation as a basis for discrimination in its acceptance letter. The Agency otherwise accepted the foregoing claims as framed and conducted an investigation into the matter. Complainant did not challenge the framing of the complaint prior to or during the investigation. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing on May 16, 2019. During the initial status conference in October 2019, Complainant (proceeding pro se) informed the AJ he wished to amend his complaint. However, Complainant did not timely amend his complaint or initiate discovery. In December 2019, Complainant obtained counsel. On December 20, 2019, Complainant, through his counsel, filed a Motion for Leave to Amend, Leave to Conduct Discovery, and to Extend Discovery Deadlines. The Motion sought to add another disability and retaliation as bases for discrimination, as well as to add additional claims. The AJ denied Complainant’s motion except to allow him to add an additional disability to his complaint. On March 27, 2020, Complainant, through his counsel, withdrew his hearing request and requested a Final Agency Decision from the Agency. The AJ acknowledged receipt of the withdrawal and closed the case in FedSep but did not issue a formal dismissal Order. On April 25, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The Agency dismissed Claim 1 regarding Complainant’s midyear pursuant to 20 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) for failure to state a claim, finding that claims involving midyear performance appraisals do not constitute discrete acts of discrimination because they do not have a permanent effect. Regarding Claim 2, the Agency found that Complainant was not denied his request for reasonable accommodation and therefore he failed to establish a prima facie case for denial of reasonable accommodation. The Agency found that even if Complainant had established his prima facie case, he failed to show the Agency acted unreasonably or unreasonably delayed the process. Therefore, even in the light most favorable to Complainant, he had not met his burden of persuasion to show by a preponderance of the evidence that he was subjected to disability discrimination. Factual Background During the investigation, Complainant testified that his race was White, his sex was male, his national origin was Hispanic/Latino, and he had a physical disability involving treatment for cancer. He was not asked about the basis of his reprisal claim during the investigation. Complainant testified that he was discriminated against by his first line supervisor, Chief Information Officer (Caucasian, female, German, no disability), and his second line supervisor, Executive Officer (Mixed race, female, Cape Verdean/American, no disability). Complainant testified that Chief Information Officer and Executive Officer were aware of his race, sex, and national origin. He also testified that they were aware of his disability since approximately November 2017 when he verbally told them about his ongoing medical appointments and provided Chief Information Officer a copy of his surgery schedule. Claim 2 – Reasonable Accommodation Complainant testified that his job duties include installing, configuring, troubleshooting, and maintaining customer hardware and software; resolving difficult customer support requests involving integration or configuration related issues and supports systems involving a wide variety of different platforms, operating systems, applications, and desktop configurations; working with network specialists, applications developers, and security specialists to prevent recurring problems; performing work pertaining primarily to the coordination, tasking, and the successful operation of the following areas: desktop support, network, and telecommunication; and performing other duties as assigned. Complainant testified that he underwent surgery in August 2018 that incapacitated him from driving to and from work, affected his ability to bend, sit, or walk for extended periods, and precluded him from lifting object over 10 pounds. He stated that this left him unable to physically install, configure, troubleshoot, and maintain customer hardware and software, and prevented him from performing physical work pertaining primarily to the coordination, tasking, and the successful operation of the following areas: desktop support, network, and telecommunication. As these responsibilities were essential to his job, Complainant sent an email to Chief Information Officer on August 6, 2018, requesting a reasonable accommodation. Complainant testified he provided a letter from his physician which stated that Complainant could resume telework starting August 9, 2018, and needed to telework through August 20, 2018. Complainant indicated that Chief Information Officer denied his request and requested additional information. He stated that the Agency later approved his request. He admitted the Agency did not deny his reasonable accommodation request and that the Agency approved his telework request for September 10, 2018 through September 20, 2018. Chief Information Officer testified that Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation was not denied. She testified Complainant was informed by both Human Resources and the reasonable accommodation group at the Agency that in order to be granted a reasonable accommodation, he needed to provide sufficient medical documentation to process his request. She stated that prior to Complainant’s surgery, they had discussed his telework options. He had asked if she would be open to telework and she said yes. She stated that once all required documentation was submitted, Complainant’s accommodation request was processed and approved within three days. She stated that Complainant appeared in the office on September 4, 2018 to return to work without any notice to her. She asked again for a doctor’s note and he emailed it to her. Chief Information Officer testified that she was out on leave for two weeks and although Complainant’s request for telework was granted for September 7, 2018 to September 20, 2018, he reported to the office in visible pain. The record reflects that on August 1, 2018, Chief Information Officer emailed Complainant noting that official time was due the following day and that Complainant should enter leave for the surgery that Complainant had indicated was the next week. She reminded Complainant that prior to his leave, she would need a note from his doctor stating that Complainant would be on medical leave for surgery and the estimated time that Complainant would be out of work post-surgery. She noted that no medical details were needed in that note. Chief Information Officer also stated that when Complainant returned to work, she would need a note from his doctor clearing Complainant to return to work and suggesting any accommodations Complainant would need. (Report of Investigation (ROI), p. 179). Complainant responded after the close of business on August 6, 2018, and attached an unsigned note from his physician stating that Complainant would be undergoing surgery on August 7, 2018, and he would not be able to lift anything greater than 10-15 pounds for six weeks. However, Complainant could resume teleworking on August 9, 2018, and would be restricted to this through September 20, 2018. However, after six weeks, Complainant would have no activity restrictions. (ROI, pp. 180-181). Chief Information Officer responded on August 9, 2018, stating that the letter provided by Complainant’s physician was not acceptable because it was not signed and the medical documentation did not “[s]pecify the existence of a disability and explain the need for you to telework for a period of six (6) weeks as a reasonable accommodation. Further, it did not explain why working in the office was medically not acceptable.” Additionally, “[e]xcept for lifting more than 10-15 pounds, it did not specify any other functional limitations due to your disability. Besides carrying your work lap top (3-4 pounds), I do not require you lift anything heavier than 10-15 pounds.” She asked Complainant to provide medical document with additional specifics and indicated that Complainant could provide his physician this letter and a copy of the attached position description to aid his physician in providing documentation. Complainant was advised to provide this information no later than August 14, 2018. (ROI, p. 183-185). On August 14, 2018, Human Resources informed Chief Information Officer and Accessibility Consultant that the medical documentation had been reviewed and it was not signed, and it did not state why the employee needed telework. It stated that once a proper medical document was received by the Occupational Medical Services and a report given to Complainant’s supervisor, the supervisor could then make a decision about the reasonable accommodation request. (ROI, pp. 189-190). On August 20, 2018, Chief Information Officer emailed that she had received a sick leave request that morning for Complainant for August 20 through August 23. She stated that she believed that since Complainant’s regular telework day was Friday, Complainant did not believe that he needed to provide medical documentation for any accommodation and/or to clear him to return to work. She stated she had not yet received any documentation from Complainant, and she believed Complainant thought that the request for documentation was her personal requirement and not the Agency’s. (ROI, p. 189). On August 21, 2018, Accessibility Consultant stated that she had contacted Complainant through his work email and telephone, as well as his personal cell phone, but she had been unable to reach him. (ROI, p. 188). However, later that day, Accessibility Consultant stated she had met with Complainant and explained the Agency’s Reasonable Accommodation program. Complainant understood his request would be processed anew and he had requested to telework fulltime until September 20, 2018. She had requested that Complainant submit sufficient supporting medical documentation to the office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion to process his request. (ROI, pp. 187-188). Accessibility Consultant clarified on August 22, 2018 that Complainant had not yet submitted medical documentation to continue processing his reasonable accommodation request and therefore his request was not ripe for decision. (ROI, p. 186). Chief Information Officer emailed Complainant on August 22, 2018 reminding him that he still needed to provide medical documentation clearing him to work and to let her know what type of leave he planned to use in the meantime. She also stated that once he was cleared to work, Complainant would need to submit medical documentation stating why he needed a reasonable accommodation and the medical release form to Occupational Medical Services so she could work with the Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion Office to provide his accommodation. (ROI, p. 191). On August 30, 2018, Complainant provided a signed work release from his physician dated August 29, 2018. The release stated that Complainant could resume work at that time, but he could not lift anything greater than 10-15 pounds for six weeks. The release stated that Complainant could “resume work in any setting (home, office, etc) as long as his activity restrictions are followed.” The release stated that Complainant would have no restrictions after 6 weeks. (ROI, p. 192). Complainant testified that on September 4, 2018, he provided Chief Information Officer and Accessibility Consultant a Medical Evaluation of Functional Activities Form from Occupational Medical Services. Complainant stated he met with the Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion and employee relations on September 6, 2018, to review his accommodation request. On September 7, 2018, Chief Information Officer granted Complainant’s request for ad hoc telework until September 20, 2018. (ROI, p. 199). Complainant testified he believed his race, national origin, and sex were factors in his request for telework as a reasonable accommodation being denied because he understood four other employees were all granted leniency to telework and did not have to go to Occupational Medical Services to request telework for personal matters. Complainant testified that he disability was a factor and he was discriminated against due to his medical condition because he had informed Chief Information Officer that he would be receiving treatment at the National Cancer Institute and there was no reason that he would fabricate a false letter. He also noted that they had discussed the opportunity for telework through Complainant’s treatment and recovery. Chief Information Officer denied that Complainant’s sex, race, national origin, or disability were factors in the Agency’s actions. Of the four employees identified by Complainant, Chief Information Officer stated that she did not supervise two of them. Chief Information Officer testified that Comparator 1 (African-American, male, African-American, unknown disability) had never requested a reasonable accommodation. She testified that Comparator 2 (White, female, American, unknown disability) did request a telework accommodation and she was allowed to telework no more than 10 hours per week and she was required to take leave for the remainder of the pay period. In addition, Comparator 2 was required to provide all therapy and doctor appointment schedules in writing by noon of the week prior to the appointments. She was also required to submit regular updates from her family member’s medical team. She returned to work full-time on April 2, 2018, with no additional telework accommodations. (The record reflects that Comparator 2 requested telework as a reasonable accommodation for a family member and she was informed she could not receive a reasonable accommodation for the needs of a family member, but she could use leave under the Family Medical Leave Act).
