S013-11

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Administrative Coordinator at the Agency’s Department of Rehabilitation Orthotic Prosthetic Lab, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. The witness and Complainant reported the matter to the Inspector General. Report of Investigation at 246-7. k) on or about July 10, 2018, a Health Systems Specialist (HSS) told Complainant that SHSS said that Complainant could not wear scrubs in the hospital as administrative personnel because it was unprofessional, which Complainant believed to be harassment; l) on June 25, 2018, Complainant became aware that SHSS told the Chief, Department of Rehabilitation (Chief) that Complainant requested for SHSS to become his supervisor, which was untrue; m) on or about June 21, 2018, SHSS sent an email to the Chief that Complainant was a “no show” for a scheduled meeting; however, Complainant did not show because he was confused about the time change; n) on or about June 19, 2018, SHSS changed Complainant’s tour of duty from 6:00 am to 3:30 pm and attempted to remove his alternative work schedule; o) on or about May 1, 2018, SHSS told Complainant that he was not allowed to work the hours of 5:30 am to 3:00 pm and requested that Complainant write down everything he does during his shift; p) on or about April 15, 2018, SHSS called Complainant to his office and told him that Complainant “wanted it easy, doesn’t want to work hard for anything, and just wanted to come and go as he pleased”; and q) from approximately April 15, 2018, to August 10, 2018, SHSS looked for Complainant for no reason, just wanting to “lay eyes” on him. The Agency accepted claims (a), (b), and (k)-(q) for investigation. The Agency dismissed claim (g) because Complainant did not raise this during the EEO counseling stage. In addition, the Agency noted that incidents (c)-(f), and (h)-(j) were untimely discrete claims, and as such, they would only be background information for the hostile work environment claim, and relief could not be granted for these allegations. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 49-51. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the ROI and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but subsequently withdrew his request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that he was subjected to discrimination as alleged. The Agency opposed Complainant’s appeal. 3 The Agency challenged the timeliness of Complainant’s appeal. However, where there is an issue of timeliness, “[a]n agency always bears the burden of obtaining sufficient information to support a reasoned determination as to timeliness.” Guy v. Dep’t of Energy, EEOC Request No.
