S013-22

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a FS-03 Recruitment and Outreach Specialist in the Agency’s Bureau of Human Resources in Washington, D.C. Complainant began working as a Recruitment and Outreach Specialist on April 23, 2018. Her first-line supervisor was the Deputy Division Chief for Recruitment Outreach (S1), and her second-line supervisor was the Division Chief for Recruitment Outreach (S2). Complainant is a heterosexual female, and she is a member of various employee affinity groups, including Gays and Lesbians in Foreign Affairs Agencies (GLIFAA), Blacks in Government (BIG), the Disability Action Group, Executive Women @ State, Asian-Americans in Foreign Affairs, and the Native American Foreign Affairs. Complainant stated that she engaged in protected EEO activity as a member of these employee affinity groups and when she opposed discrimination by telling S1 and S2 that they could not base employee assignments on their assumptions about an employee’s membership in a protected group. According to Complainant, she mentioned that she was a member of GLIFAA during her interview for the Recruitment and Outreach Specialist position with S1 and S2 in April 2018. Complainant alleged that, because she mentioned her involvement in GLIFAA, S1 and S2 assumed that she was a member of the LGBTQ community. Complainant stated that, during the interview, S1 and S2 discussed Complainant taking over the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio from another employee (C1). On April 27, 2018, S2 assigned Complainant recruitment duties including Bureau of Information Resource Management (IRM) recruitment, LGBTQ recruitment, and a USA Jobs data mining project. Complainant stated that, on May 2, 2018, she mentioned her husband while she was talking to S1 about her background and recruiting goals. Complainant averred that S1 responded that he thought Complainant was gay and that she replied that she was not. According to Complainant, she and S1 continued their discussion about recruiting goals. Complainant stated that, on May 3, 2018, she called S1 to discuss his comment from the day before. Complainant alleged that S1 apologized for saying that he thought that she was gay and stated that he had not meant to offend her. According to Complainant, she responded that she was not offended, and she asked S1 if he had assigned her the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio because he thought she was gay. Complainant averred that S1 said no, that was not the reason. Complainant stated that S1 indicated that he thought she was gay because she was a member of GLIFAA. Complainant averred that, on May 8, 2018, C1 invited her to a meeting with the GLIFAA President. According to Complainant, on May 8, 2018, S2 told her in that he was removing the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio from her duties. Complainant stated that S2 stated that he made this decision after talking to S1. Complainant averred that S2 told her that LGBTQ recruitment would be replaced with Overseas Building Operations (OBO) recruitment, which he characterized as a large, complex portfolio that needed a lot of attention. Complainant stated that, after S2 told her that he would be taking away the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio, she approached S1 and asked him not to change her assignments. According to Complainant, S1 became abrasive and started yelling at her that she had been offended that he had asked if she was gay. Complainant alleged that another Recruitment and Outreach Specialist (C2) overheard S1 yelling at her and stopped at Complainant’s cubicle later to ask what had happened. C2 denied hearing S1 yell at Complainant. According to C2, she heard S1 tell Complainant that she had been offended, but C2 stated that S1 used a normal tone of voice. At 2:31 p.m. on May 8, 2018, Complainant emailed S2 and asked to meet. In the email, she stated that she still wanted to have the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio and that she was confused about why it had been reassigned. Complainant stated that she met with S2 and told him that it was inappropriate and discriminatory for S1 to ask her about her sexual orientation and then change her duties as a result. According to Complainant, S2 asked when he could meet with her and S1 to discuss the matter. On May 9, 2018, S2 sent Complainant an invitation to a 10:00 a.m. meeting, and Complainant declined the meeting request. Complainant averred that S2 stopped by her cubicle after she declined the meeting request and told her that he did not think it was a good idea that Complainant did not want to discuss the matter. S2 stated that he offered multiple times to meet with Complainant and S1 to discuss their communication. According to S2, Complainant refused to meet. Complainant alleged that, after she declined S2’s meeting invitation, S1 began sending her multiple requests to speak at four events and to meet to work on the OBO recruiting portfolio over the course of 10 days. Complainant stated that she was overwhelmed by the amount of meetings and events. S2 stated that he was not aware of Complainant’s allegation that S1 began assigning her extra events to harass her until she filed her EEO complaint, but he noted that it is not unusual for employees to staff multiple recruitment events in one day. Complainant averred that, on May 10, 2018, S2 asked her to stop in his office and discussed meeting with S1. According to Complainant, she told S2 that asking her to meet with S1 made it seem as though she was causing a problem, when the issue was that she was pointing out that she should not be subjected to discrimination. Complainant stated that S2 responded that he wanted to make sure that she and S1 would be able to work together, to which she responded that she was a professional. On May 11, 2018, S2 sent a group email with the latest recruiting assignments attached. In the attachment, the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio had been removed from Complainant’s assignments and reassigned to C1. Complainant was on preapproved annual leave on May 11, 2018. According to Complainant, the change in assignment caused her significant stress and anxiety, diminishing her ability to enjoy her day off and the weekend. Complainant stated that she also took eight hours of annual leave on June 11 and on June 13, 2018, in order to avoid the uncomfortable situation with S1 and S2. On June 21, 2018, Complainant’s request to be assigned to a different office was approved, and that was her last day as a Recruitment and Outreach Specialist. S2 stated that he reassigned the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio to C1 as part of a general rebalancing of the recruitment workload. According to S2, there were as many as 10 Recruitment and Outreach Specialists based in D.C. at a time, and there were more than 20 recruiting portfolio areas. S2 averred that, although Complainant expressed interest in continuing to handle LGBTQ recruitment, he reassigned it based on overall workload. S2 denied that Complainant’s sex, sexual orientation, and/or protected EEO activity were factors in reassigning the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio. On August 14, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of sex (female), sexual orientation (heterosexual), 2 and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when: 1. On May 8, 2018, the LGBTQ recruitment portfolio was removed from her duties; and 2. She was subjected to a hostile work environment that was characterized by constant scrutiny of her work product, unfair criticism, and scheduling of multiple work obligations within a short time period. According to the record, the EEO investigator did not interview S1 because he no longer worked for the Agency. The EEO investigator also did not interview C1, and the investigative record does not contain any demographic information about C1’s sex, sexual orientation, or prior protected activity. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency’s final decision dismissed reprisal as a basis for Complainant’s claims, reasoning that participating in an employee affinity group did not constitute protected EEO activity. The Agency found that Complainant could not establish a prima facie case of sex discrimination because there was no evidence of discriminatory animus or that the Agency treated a male and/or gay employee more favorably than Complainant. Assuming arguendo that Complainant could establish a prima facie case of disparate treatment, the Agency found that the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for adjusting Complainant’s recruiting assignments was that she was needed to take over the OBO recruiting portfolio as part of a rebalancing of workload, and the Agency determined that Complainant had not established that this legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason was pretextual. In Bostock v. Clayton Cty., the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590 U.S. ___, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020); see also Baldwin v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC [number removed] (July 15, 2015) (an allegation of discrimination based on sexual orientation states a claim of sex discrimination under Title VII because sexual orientation is inherently a sex-based consideration). Regarding Complainant’s hostile work environment claim, the Agency found that Complainant only provided generalized allegations of harassment, that the preponderance of the evidence did not establish a nexus between the alleged harassment and her sex or sexual orientation, and that the alleged harassment was insufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment. The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.
