S013-01

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a General Engineer, ND801-04, in the A44 Software Applications & System Security Engineering Branch, with the Agency’s Naval Surface Warfare Center in Dahlgren, Virginia. On January 4, 2019, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of age (YOB:1953) and reprisal (prior protected EEO activity) when: 1. On December 17, 2018, Complainant was chastised for taking too many professional development courses; 3. On December 20, 2018, Complainant was not selected for a Group Lead position within his Branch; and 4. On January 30, 2019, Complainant was notified that his reconsideration request for DEMO incentive pay for fiscal year 2018 was denied, after receiving notification on December 17, 2018, that he would not receive DEMO incentive pay for fiscal year 2018. Complainant’s first-level supervisor was the A44 Branch Head (S1), his second-level supervisor was the Division Head, A40, Cyber Technologies & Software Systems Division, and his third- level supervisor was the Department Head of A Department (S3). Regarding claim (1), in August 2018, Complainant applied for the position of Manager, ND-05, under Vacancy Announcement No. ST-10260892-18-JF. Complainant was included on the Certificate of Eligibles and was one of seven candidates referred for an interview. After the interviews, the interview panel notified S2, the Recommending Official, of their decision. Three candidates were unanimously recommended as “Most Qualified” with the eventual Selectee listed as the interview panel’s first choice. The panel did not recommend Complainant for further consideration. Complainant believed he was the most qualified for the position because he had performed this type of work before, had a “professional master’s degree in applied physics, Defense Acquisition University Level III and Level II,” and had years of experience supporting Joint Operations and Joint Projects with the Joint Warfare Analysis Center through Joint Forces Command, (a customer of A42). Complainant asserted that he was more qualified for the position of A42 Branch Head because he worked for the Agency for many years, from 1997-2000, in a group that did the same work as A42. He alleged that he had experience in managing engineering projects and managing people working with all services including Army, Navy, Marines and Air Force, as well as the global communications command, control, and logistics infrastructure necessary to support them. S2 explained the interview questions for the A42 Branch Head position were developed based on the desired skill set, technical discipline, and experience with Mission Assurance, which is central to the branch’s mission. He indicated that the questions were vetted and approved by Human Resources in keeping with their standard process. The interview panel presented their interview findings to him, and S2 conducted the second interviews with the three candidates recommended by the panel for follow-up interviews. S2 ultimately recommended Selectee to S3, the Selecting Official. S3 accepted his recommendation and the position was offered to Selectee. One of the panel members (PM1) explained that the Selectee’s experience, demeanor, presence, knowledge, confidence, and attitude contributed to her better answers. Further, PM1 noted that Complainant was not better qualified because he had limited history with the branch and had no current knowledge of A42 branch operations. Another panel member (PM2) stated that Complainant did not have recent personnel oversight responsibilities on his resume, and he did not describe any in his interview. PM2 added that Complainant’s most recent experiences were more related to program management than line management and his identification of the branch challenges was extremely limited and did not align with the challenges that the panel chair briefed them on prior to the interview. Further, she explained that Complainant failed to answer question eight and part of question two, so the panel was unable to consider this information. Meanwhile, the Selectee talked about the growth opportunity, her comfort with leading an unfamiliar organization, and the experience she had doing so. PM2 noted that the selectee discussed her knowledge of mission assurance and understanding vulnerabilities as well as her ability to be a decisive leader, ensuring technical rigor, assessing risks and enabling people to be successful. The Selectee also described her experience shaping and teaming, interacting with senior leadership, how she would motivate others and grow the branch, and explained her immediate plan of action as well as her long-term plans. Another panel member (PM3) testified that although Complainant demonstrated vast technical knowledge and experience, his answers to interview questions did not demonstrate knowledge about the branch head role as he did not provide insight into how he would manage as a branch head or comprehensively describe the responsibilities of a branch head. Even though the Selectee had weaknesses knowing the exact reality or situation in the branch, she proposed actions to learn the organization or provide relevant experience making logical assumptions or comparisons about organizations. As to claim (3), S1 sent an email on December 3, 2018, advertising an opportunity to serve as a Group Lead. Complainant expressed interest in the role and was interviewed by S1 and the Anti- Tamper (AT) Technical Lead. Complainant believed he answered their questions well during the interview and said he provided examples on how to motivate the team. Complainant was notified he was not selected when S1 sent an email on December 20, 2018, announcing the two candidates that were selected as the new Group Leads. S1 explained that it was an internal role and not an official hiring action. S1 and the AT Technical Lead developed the interview questions and interviewed the candidates. S1 explained that the factors used in assessing the candidates included an understanding of the Group Lead role, the group tasking, and the issues facing the group as well as leadership potential and vision for the future. While Complainant’s resume showed relevant experience, during the interview, Complainant failed to answer many of the questions directly; did not seem aware of the issue and concerns facing the group; and his responses were that he would do what the current Group Lead was doing without offering real solutions or ideas. Meanwhile, the selected candidate had concrete ideas for the future of the group and well-documented technical and leadership qualifications. With respect to claim (4), on December 11, 2018, S1 gave Complainant his Notice of Projected Pay Adjustment for Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 notifying him that that he would not receive DEMO (pay for performance) incentive pay for FY2018. On December 17, 2018, Complainant and S1 met again to discuss Complainant’s concern of the lack of bonus pay and the process for DEMO pay reconsideration. Complainant stated S1 informed him that his team gave negative feedback regarding his contributions to the team. S1 explained that she sent Complainant an email on December 20, 2018, stating she re-reviewed Complainant’s self-assessment, feedback from his Group Lead, the AT subject matter expert, and the DEMO benchmarks. She explained Complainant had acceptable performance which was reflected in his organization contribution score, but the Complainant’s Yearly Objective and Expectations set her intention for him to lead AT projects and provide guidance to customers. However, throughout the year, Complainant was counseled that his view of AT guidance and process is different from the Agency’s view, which impacted his ability to meet technical and leadership expectations since he failed to demonstrate an understanding of the AT process in order to obtain a leadership role in the organization. Complainant then formally requested reconsideration of the FY2018 DEMO decision to S3. S3 denied Complainant’s request for reconsideration on January 30, 2019, because his investigation found Complainant was adequately compensated. As to claim (2), Complainant averred S1 and S3 chastised him for taking too many professional development courses when S1 said they took into consideration the training classes when determining his DEMO payout, however, the classes did not change their decision. Complainant interpreted this comment as management stating he needed to pay more attention to AT classes instead of cybersecurity classes. 2 S1 and S3 both denied chastising Complainant for any training. S1 affirmed that she would guess that Complainant had taken six to eight classes over the year, but they did not affect his job performance in a positive or negative way. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final agency decision (FAD) and the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that management subjected him to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The cybersecurity classes were awarded to Complainant in a previous EEO complaint the previous year before he came to work in Dahlgren.
