S013-25

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

Shipyard & Intermediate Maintenance Facility, located in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. The record reflects the following chronology of events. Complainant alleged that he was subjected to race, national origin, and reprisal discrimination between June and December of 2020, in connection with training and selection for a WG-11 Crane Operator position. Complainant alleged that his Branch Head gave him bad advice concerning his application for the promotion, causing him not to make the Certificate of Eligibles. Complainant further claimed that he was subsequently told he would have to accept a WG-09 position in order to be considered for a WG- 11 Crane Operator position but that his WG-10 pay would not be saved. Complainant also alleged that at various points his work on cranes was restricted and eventually eliminated. In December of 2020, Complainant was charged with being absent without leave (AWOL) for a date in October. Following the conclusion of the investigation of his December 30, 2020 complaint, Complainant requested a final agency decision on the merits of the complaint rather than requesting a hearing before an Administrative Judge appointed by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The requested final agency decision was issued on August 17, 2021, and found that the Agency did not discriminate or retaliate against Complainant. Complainant timely appealed the final agency decision to the EEOC. On August 17, 2023, the Commission issued its decision in EEOC [number removed], finding that the Agency had not discriminated based on race or national origin but had subjected Complainant to reprisal, both with respect to offering Complainant the lower graded position and marking him as AWOL. Among other remedies, the Agency was to give Complainant an opportunity to submit evidence in support of a possible entitlement to an award of compensatory damages and to issue a final agency decision on that subject. The record reflects that the report of the investigation of Complainant's compensatory damages claim was submitted on October 10, 2023. The Agency subsequently issued a final decision. In its final decision, the Agency noted that Complainant claims an unspecified amount for pecuniary losses and $250,000.00 for non-pecuniary losses. In support of the claim, Complainant submitted no documentary evidence in support of his pecuniary losses. Complainant does submit his affidavit and statements from his spouse, sister and mother in support of his claim for non-pecuniary damages. With respect to pecuniary losses, the Agency denied Complainant’s request. In so doing, the Agency noted that Complainant did not submit testimony or evidence requesting pecuniary compensatory damages. While his sister references using the award of compensatory damages to pay for medical and psychological therapy expenses, the record does not include any evidence that Complainant has incurred any medical expenses associated with the Agency's retaliation. The documentation submitted by Complainant shows that the last treatment with a psychiatrist was in March of 2021. In any event, the record does not include any evidence of payments to medical providers or bills for medical treatments. Complainant mentions that he was prescribed omeprazole (Prilosec) for his acid reflux and sertraline (Zoloft) for depression and identifies his costs for a refill of each prescription but does not present any receipts for out-of-pocket expenses for these medications. The Agency stated that it would not speculate on those expenses based on the scant information provided by Complainant. Complainant claims to have borrowed money from his sister but does not present any evidence of the amount borrowed, when that occurred, why the loan was required, or whether he was obligated to pay interest. In addition, Complainant alleges that he took a loan of $43,000.00 from his Thrift Savings Program (TSP) retirement account. Once again, he does not present any evidence to show if or when that occurred. If borrowing from his retirement account was intended to cover normal living expenses, that would be remedied as part of Complainant's back pay award. There is no evidence that any of Complainant's financial difficulties are attributable to anything at work. Complainant also references that he used leave to avoid having to report for work at the shipyard during the time period covered by this complaint. An award of compensatory damages does not include leave restoration. Moreover, EEOC did not award leave restoration in its August 17, 2023 decision. The Agency found that based on the minimal evidence submitted for the record, no award of pecuniary compensatory damages is warranted. Concerning his claim for non-pecuniary losses, the Agency noted that to the extent that Complainant and one of his witnesses are claiming that pursuing his EEO claims has caused him aggravation and emotional distress, the Commission has consistently held that an employee cannot recover compensatory damages for emotional distress allegedly endured as a result of participating in the EEO process. It bears mentioning that Complainant first sought psychological counseling on December 21, 2020, approximately one month after his initial interview with the EEO Counselor and one week before he filed his formal complaint of discrimination. Complainant's wife indicates that Complainant believed his colleagues avoided him after he chose to file his complaint, and the day they received the Agency's final decision was "one of the worst days for us as a family." Again, the Agency maintains that any effects arguably attributable to Complainant's participation in the EEO complaint process are not compensable. Complainant, his wife, and his sister all state that Complainant suffered financial distress and implied that it was related to the Agency's discrimination. Complainant states in his testimony that his financial issues began in 2019. However, the retaliation for which the Agency is liable did not begin until June 2020. Complainant notes that he was unable to keep up with rent payments “multiple times” between 2019 and 2023, used his credit cards to their limits, borrowed from his sister, and took out a $43,000.00 loan from his TSP retirement account. There is no evidence to connect the financial straits such as Complainant described to events occurring between June and December of 2020, none of which changed his grade and pay. In fact, Complainant told his General Foreman in March 2020 that he was expecting a child in the fall and that he was in financial peril. Complainant told him how much the promotion would help his family immensely. At all times relevant to this complaint, Complainant was fully employed as a WG- 10 Rigger/Material Equipment Operator. Complainant's wife notes that they had four children and a baby on the way and were "not doing well" financially because they were $56,000.00 in debt. Complainant's sister identifies as a contributory reason for the family's financial situation; namely, Complainant's ex-wife's choice to seek, and presumably obtain, greater child support payments. She also observes that Complainant's overtime was reduced but fails to acknowledge that Complainant was training as a Crane Operator, not functioning in his Rigger position. In short, the Agency concluded there is no credible evidence that Complainant's inability to make ends meet between June and December of 2020 had anything to do with his failure to obtain a promotion or related issues. The Agency emphasized that it is only potentially liable for medical expenses if its discrimination has caused the health problem or if its discrimination has exacerbated a pre-existing condition, but only to the extent of the exacerbation. Complainant acknowledges that his alopecia is a pre-existing condition and claims that the Agency's discrimination caused clumps of his hair to fall out between October of 2020 and the present. However, he makes no attempt to establish to what extent the condition was exacerbated by the Agency's retaliation. Since the issues in this complaint ended in December of 2020, only hair loss that occurred within a reasonable time following the events of December of 2020 would be relevant to this claim for compensatory damages. Complainant's wife asserts that the discrimination caused stress and Complainant lost hair as a result but does not indicate how often or when this occurred. Complainant submitted a picture of a person's head with a bald spot above the right ear but does not indicate when the picture was taken. There is no medical evidence in the record to indicate that Complainant was treated for alopecia at any time during the period covered by this complaint, only that the condition was diagnosed in 2011. There is no plausible evidence that Complainant has suffered any long-term physical or psychiatric condition as a result of the Agency's actions. The only medical evidence submitted for the record was a document entitled "Note From Hawaii Pacific Health" which shows that Complainant was a new telemedicine patient at the Straub Kapolei Clinic on August 7, 2020, with the reason for the visit "chest pains." The report lists diagnosed conditions as gastrointestinal reflux, hyperlipidemia, transaminitis, generalized abdominal pain, and diarrhea. However, these appear to be the conditions reported by Complainant in his pre-existing medical records since this was a telemedicine visit and some of the conditions develop over a long period of time and/or would require laboratory tests to confirm their existence. The next appointment, according to the Note, was a twenty-minute telephone call with a Psychiatrist on December 1, 2020, after which the Psychiatrist diagnosed Complainant with post-traumatic stress disorder. There are no medical notes produced by Complainant indicating the source, cause, or time period when symptoms of this medical condition began. Complainant did not submit any evidence of medical visits/treatments between August 7, 2020 and December 1, 2020. The documents produced for the three medical visits also indicate that Complainant suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder, but the records contain no explanation how or why the medical providers arrived at their conclusions, how the condition manifests itself, what limitations or effects it imposes on Complainant, or any specific information about the nature and severity of the condition. There is no medical or other plausible evidence of severe emotional distress as claimed by Complainant. The record does not include any bona fide evidence that Complainant was rendered unable to work and there is no evidence in the record that his attendance was any worse while the discrimination was occurring than it was previously. Complainant and his wife note in their testimony that Complainant's supervisor told him that he had to improve his attendance and accrue some leave. Complainant and his wife both state that his problems at work placed a strain on their relationship. However, Complainant admits that they were seeing a marriage counselor between January of 2019 and March of 2020, before the issues in this complaint occurred. Complainant's sister indicates that her first reaction was to think that her brother's situation was related to his relationship with his "long-time girlfriend." The family's financial condition, unrelated to the issues in this complaint, was obviously a cause of distress. Complainant's mother states that the Agency's treatment of her son caused tension in his marriage. Complainant indicates that he believes that an award of $250,000.00 would adequately compensate his emotional distress and the exacerbation of his physical conditions. While Complainant mentions "conditions" (plural), the evidence only references a single physical or mental condition that could have been exacerbated, his alopecia. The amount requested by Complainant is excessive and is more punitive than compensatory. Punitive damages are not available in the federal sector EEO complaint process. The Agency concluded that the case law supports an award of $25,000.00 due to the superficial medical evidence submitted and the conclusory nature of the complainant's and witnesses' testimony. Additionally, the Agency noted that with respect to Complainant being marked 1.3 hours AWOL in October 2020, in Israel F. v. United States Postal Service, EEOC [number removed] (March 2, 2021), the Commission awarded a complainant $1500.00 in non-pecuniary compensatory damages resulting from a one time, retaliatory charge of 8 hours of AWOL, where the complainant asserted emotional harm from the Agency's discriminatory act and evidence in the record provided a modicum of support for this assertion. Accordingly, based on the nature and severity of emotional harm to Complainant, the duration of the harm, the amount of damage awards in similar cases, and the fact that only some of Complainant's emotional harm was attributable to the Agency’s discriminatory actions, the Agency found that an award of $26,500.00 is reasonable for Complainant’s proven non- pecuniary loss in connection with the Agency’s actions.
