S013-03

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Vocational Rehabilitation Counselor for Transitional Work, Grade Service 11, in the Compensated Work Therapy Department at the Agency’s Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System in North Little Rock, Arkansas. On March 13, 2019, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment and discriminated against her based on her disability (physical and mental) when: 1. on January 23, 2019, the Vocational Rehabilitation Supervisor (Supervisor), failed to train Complainant on how to prepare files for an audit in the newly assigned work area; 2. on January 25, 2019, Complainant submitted her resignation (constructive discharge) from the position of Vocational Counselor, after the Supervisor created an intolerable work environment after Complainant spoke out against the unfair treatment of a veteran, and coworker (Coworker 1), effective February 8, 2019; 3. on January 25, 2019, Complainant became aware that the Supervisor and her coworker (Coworker 2) had spread her personal information that she had resigned by stating, "That girl [Complainant] done quit today."; 4. on February 1, 2019, the Supervisor issued Complainant a Probationary Warning letter of Unacceptable Performance; 5. on February 5, 2019, Complainant believe the Supervisor used passive aggressive tactic when she reassigned the duty of collecting birthdates of co-workers and assigned Complainant several tasks with short deadlines; 6. on February 6, 2019, Complainant became aware that the Supervisor was standing outside her door listening to her conversation with the Disability Advocate; 7. on February 11, 2019, Complainant became aware that the Supervisor, Coworker 2, and another coworker (Coworker 3) were spreading false statements regarding her complaining about having a meeting to discuss timesheets and saying it was not her duty; 8. on February 13, 2019, Complainant became aware that the Supervisor had submitted her letter of resignation to administration; 9. on February 20, 2019, Complainant became aware that the Supervisor caused her to be blocked from having computer access. On May 8, 2019, the Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. In its acceptance, the Agency only found claim 4 to constitute an independently discrete and actionable claim. The Agency accepted the remaining claims as part of Complainant’s hostile work environment claim. The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims. Complainant stated that the Supervisor was the only responsible management official. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 60. Complainant stated that when she began her employment in July 2018, her relationship with the Supervisor was very cordial and professional. ROI at 62. Complainant asserted that much of the harassment started after she started to defend Coworker 1 as being treated unfairly. ROI at 14; 62. Complainant asserts in her appellate statement that the harassment was linked to her participation in Coworker 1’s EEO complaint. Complainant noted that shortly after she spoke up for Coworker 1, she received a warning letter. Id. Complainant also asserted that she began to be “outcasted by several coworkers because they did not want to (sic) be victims of retaliation by [the Supervisor].” Id. Complainant asserted that one of the six coworkers (Coworker 4) was eventually detailed to a different department and was also excluded in many things because she built a relationship with Coworker 1. Complainant also alleged that Coworker 4 was warned not to build such relationship with Coworker 1. Id. Complainant listed six coworkers that could attest to the situation and retaliation by the Supervisor, these coworkers include Coworker 2, Coworker 3, Coworker 4, Coworker 5, Coworker 6, and Coworker 7. Id. Complainant also alleged that the Supervisor was using her disability and passive aggressive tactics in a manner that exacerbated her condition. ROI at 63. For example, Complainant asserted that the Supervisor required her to physically go to hospital sites to collect timesheets even though the Supervisor had previously informed Site Supervisors at the hospitals that timesheets could be submitted through email, fax, hand delivery, or Agency mail. Complainant noted that she had a known disability and that the Supervisor was purposely engaging in harmful tactics. Id. On February 6, 2019, Complainant put in a request for reasonable accommodations but asserted that the Supervisor refused to fill her portion. ROI at 68-69. On March 18, 2019, Complainant cancelled her reasonable accommodation request during her last week of employment with the Agency. ROI at 69; 326. The EEO Investigator did not question Complainant on claims 1-3, 5-9, instead only asking her to verify the claims were correct. ROI at 70-72. Regarding claim 4, Complainant stated that she was informed by the Supervisor that she was not performing the duties of her position. ROI at 72. Complainant noted that she was given the letter of warning just one day after the Supervisor spoke to her regarding Coworker 1. ROI at 73. Complainant did not detail what the conversation was about. Id. Complainant noted that while she had previously received praise for her work by the Supervisor, the tone and environment changed once she “spoke up against inappropriate measures [the Supervisor] was utilizing against Veterans 2 and the coworker, [Coworker 1]. ROI at 73-74. Complainant concluded her affidavit by asserting that that the Supervisor used her disabilities to harass, retaliate, reprimand, and discriminate against her. ROI at 79. Complainant’s affidavit also discusses her concerns with how the Supervisor generally treated veterans that utilized the Agency’s services. ROI at 80. To the extent that Complainant is asserting reprisal based on her interactions with the Supervisor in discussing veterans that utilized the Agency’s services, as stated in part of claim 3, or her own status as a veteran, the Commission does not have jurisdiction over the veterans' preference statutes or veterans' affirmative action programs. Therefore, any claims associated with veterans or veteran’s status is not included in the Commission’s purview. Alegre v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC [number removed] (July 27, 2010). While Complainant was only asked to verify the accuracy of the claims she submitted, the EEO Investigator asked the Supervisor to respond to each of the nine claims. ROI at 146-162. The record also contains a statement from the Acting Associate Chief of Staff (Associate Chief). The Associate Chief was Complainant’s fourth line supervisor but stated that he did not have a working relationship with her and only briefly interacted with her. ROI at 295. Aside from being aware of the probationary letter sent in claim 4, he was unaware of the details in the other claims. ROI at 299. The Chief Psychologist (Chief), Complainant’s third line supervisor was also interviewed. The Chief also noted that he did not have a working relationship with Complainant and did not recall ever speaking with her or having any real knowledge of the claims. ROI at 309-312. The Human Resources Specialist for Employee and Labor Relations (HR Specialist) assisted Complainant in her reasonable accommodation request. ROI at 316. The HR Specialist noted that Complainant had emailed the office and asserted that she was withdrawing her reasonable accommodation request as of March 18, 2019, as she was leaving the facility and transferring to another facility that week. ROI at 317; 326. The Investigation does not contain any affidavits from any of the individuals that Complainant listed as potential witnesses, nor does the Investigator provide any indication as to why those individuals were not contacted. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final Agency decision (FAD), accordingly, the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency determined that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination or retaliation as alleged.
