S013-12

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by the Agency as a Border Protection Agent, GS-1896-12, Detroit Sector, at the Agency’s Detroit Sector Headquarters, in Detroit, Michigan. From June 2017 through June 2018, a Supervisory Border Patrol Agent launched an “off the books” investigation of Complainant whereby supervisory and non- supervisory employees questioned Complainant about his children; surveilled his home and family; used Agency databases to investigate his finances and criminal background; requested his location after work hours; monitored his work email and personal social media use, generated reports about his personal life; disclosed information to employees regarding the investigation; and asked him “who is going to kick your door in today,” 2. On April 11, 2018, Complainant learned he was not selected for the position of Border Patrol Agent (Operational Mobility Announcement), GS-1896- 05/12, at the Sandusky Bay Station, Detroit Sector, in Port Clinton, Ohio advertised under Job Opportunity Announcement (“JOA”) No. USBP-OM-10058024-CS. 3. On May 24, 2018, Complainant was notified that he was not selected for the position of Border Patrol Agent (Operational Mobility Announcement), GS-1896- 05/12, at the Sandusky Bay Station, Detroit Sector, in Port Clinton, Ohio, advertised under JOA No. USBP-OM-10202002-JRB, although he was actually selected for the position. 4. In June or July 2018, Complainant overheard a Supervisory Agent comment, “It’s a shame [Complainant] called EEO because now we have to investigate it,” referring to Complainant’s EEO complaint. Prior to investigating Complainant’s complaint, the Agency dismissed an additional nonselection claim for untimely EEO contact. 2 At the conclusion of its investigation of the accepted claims, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation (“ROI”) and notice of his right to request a FAD or a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (“AJ”). Complainant requested a hearing and the parties engaged in discovery. Complainant subsequently withdrew his hearing request and asked for a FAD instead. The evidence developed through the EEO investigation and discovery reveals that in July 2016, Complainant was detailed to the Agency’s Sandusky Bay Station in Port Clinton, Ohio from his permanent duty station in Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. Complainant relocated his family to Ohio, believing that Management would find him a permanent position at Sandusky Bay Station. However, in October 2016, the detail ended. Complainant’s supervisor at Sault Ste. Marie Station, a Special Operations Supervisor (also referenced as an Executive Officer), GS-1896-13, granted him a transfer to the Agency’s Detroit Sector Headquarters, in Detroit, Michigan. (September 21, 2017, JOA No. MHCBPROB-1910426-CS), for untimely EEO contact pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §1614.107(a)(2). There, Complainant was assigned to Pre-Employment Activities (Recruiting) and later detailed to the Detroit Sector Border Intelligence Center (“BIC”). Meanwhile, Complainant applied to positions at Sandusky Bay Station. In or around June 2017, Supervisor transferred to Detroit Sector BIC. Soon afterward, a meeting was held with Supervisor, management officials and some of Complainant’s colleagues. Complainant did not attend the meeting, but afterward, he noticed a marked change in the other employees’ attitudes toward him. According to Complainant, some managers and agents stopped speaking to him, while others “made crude comments relating to [his] family.” Complainant began to notice when agents called and asked where he was, and when, during conversations (“interviews”), agents asked him personal questions about his family and finances. Considering the events collectively, Complainant concluded that he was being subjected to an “off the books” investigation. Complainant alleges that the “off the books” investigation continued until June 2018 when he initiated the instant complaint. Among other things, Supervisor allegedly directed employees at the Detroit Sector BIC to monitor Complainant’s emails and social media accounts and access his financial records and various law enforcement records. Complainant further alleges that agents involved in the investigation verbally informed him that they were surveilling his home and family. Complainant is not aware of the outcome of the investigation but confirms that it did not result in any official action by the Agency. In September 2017, Complainant learned that he was not selected after interviewing for a position at Sandusky Bay Station. 3 On or around October 26, 2017, Complainant responded to the job announcement for the position referenced in Claim 2. On January 19, 2018, the Human Resources Management Office (“HRM”) notified Complainant that he was deemed eligible and that his application was referred for consideration. On or about April 11, 2018, HRM informed Complainant that he was not selected. He cites these incidents as evidence that Management was deliberately preventing him from working at his desired location of Sandusky Bay Station in order to harass him and get him to resign. On or about May 1, 2018, Complainant responded to the job announcement for the position referenced in Claim 3. He was deemed qualified, but, once again, he was not selected. Complainant recounts that he spoke to a Division Chief, GS-1896-14, Detroit Sector Headquarters (Complainant’s fifth level supervisor) when he learned of his nonselection. The Division Chief informed Complainant privately that he “made some calls and pulled some strings” and secured the position at Sandusky Bay Station for Complainant. Complainant responded, “it would have been nice to hear that a week ago because I already filed an EEO complaint.” He then asked Division Chief, “what about the investigation?” Complainant recounts that the Division Chief acted as though he was unaware of Complainant’s EEO complaint, claimed that there was no investigation, then swore and walked away. Complainant submitted his resignation in October 2017 withdrew it and continued to seek a transfer to Sandusky Bay Station. In or around August 2018, Management became aware of Complainant’s allegation that Supervisor initiated an unauthorized investigation and notified the Agency’s Office of Professional Responsibility (“OPR”). OPR opened an internal investigation of Supervisor for “major/criminal misconduct” (OPR Case No. [number removed]), which addressed Complainant’s allegations in Claim 4. In September 2018, Complainant was assigned to the position referenced in Claim 3 and he transferred to Sandusky Bay Station, Detroit Sector, in Port Clinton, OH. Complainant clarifies: “[t]o say that I was selected for this position is a mischaracterization of what happened. I was assigned to this position at Sandusky Bay Station only after I filled [out] an informal EEO complaint.” Emphasis original. Division Chief maintains that he facilitated Complainant’s transfer on June 1, 2018, before Complainant’s initial EEO contact. On October 30, 2018, OPR issued a Bluebook Report, which the Agency provided for the record. The Report summarized interviews of Complainant, Supervisor, two agents who Complainant alleged told him of their surveillance activities, the management official who was allegedly reading his emails and researching his financial information, and others in the Detroit Sector Intelligence Unit allegedly involved or aware of the investigation (a total of 9 interviews). The witnesses all denied Complainant’s allegations and the report concluded that Complainant’s allegations were “unfounded.” Complainant acknowledges that he was never formally notified of the investigation and that he lacks evidence to support that it occurred. However, Complainant provided the EEO Investigator and the AJ with lists documents that could prove he was subject to an “off the books” investigation and a list of 15 individuals who were allegedly aware of or participated in the investigation. Complainant asserts that travel vouchers from January 1, 2017 through August 1, 2018, along with field intelligence reports, requests for information and one-pagers, in relation to him and his activities all exist. He identifies other types of documents, such as federal court records, and disciplinary records for supervisors, and EEO investigative records for his colleagues’ complaints, but does not state how they would establish that the “off the books” investigation occurred. Complainant states that there is a report called an Administrator’s Audit Report that will establish that Management was monitoring his emails. The FAD concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
