S013-28

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Loan Specialist, GS-1165-13, in the Agency’s Trade Credit and Insurance (TCI) Division at the Agency’s facility in Washington, D.C. The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims. Claim 1 In 2006, Complainant was hired to work for the Agency in its Miami, Florida office. In August 2009, Complainant was diagnosed with Prostate Cancer. His condition does not substantially limit his ability to care for himself. However, his only treatment, Androgen Deprivation Therapy (ADT), has several side effects such as fatigue, weight gain, loose bowel, frequent urination, hot flashes, depression, mood swings, bone loss and fractures, and a loss of muscle mass and strength. Complainant’s condition and treatments do not impact his ability to perform his job nor does he expect it to in the short term. Complainant stated that in late 2010 or early 2011 and while receiving ADT, he was granted an accommodation to telework 2-days per week. In April 2015, the Director of TCI (RMO1 2) stated that he researched Complainant’s track record and noted that he had low productivity. RMO1 asserted that Complainant had a confrontational manner, lacked professionalism, and was resistant to accountability. RMO1 also had concerns with Complainant’s telework schedule. RMO1 noted that on multiple occasions, Complainant was not available or had lengthy periods of unannounced disconnection that he would later attribute to computer problems. RMO1 stated that he discussed his concerns about Complainant with the Acting Chief Human Capital Officer 3 (RMO2). RMO1 stated that they discussed the option of a management-directed reassignment to better supervise Complainant’s work. In early 2016, the Agency developed a plan to cross-train loan officers/underwriters and administrative staff to reduce silos and build skills that enabled staff to be detailed or support other areas as volume dictated. The Agency noted that it had been operating without a Board quorum and the goal of the cross-training program was to ensure that, once a Board quorum was established, all underwriters would be capable of reviewing and processing a variety of transactions to avoid a large backlog. Part of this plan required all staff of the TCI Division to relocate to the Washington, D.C. headquarters. Responsible Management Official (RMO). The EEO Investigator noted that RMO2 testified to information she heard and did not provide her own firsthand knowledge of the claims. On September 27, 2016, Complainant received a relocation order to transfer from Miami, Florida to Washington, D.C., effective February 6, 2017. The relocation order noted that those who chose not to relocate could lose employment with the Agency. Complainant expressed his concerns and dissatisfaction regarding the relocation order, noting that his entire medical, personal, and familial networks were in Florida. Complainant requested reconsideration of the relocation order. The Senior Advisor (RMO3) states she made the decision to reassign Complainant to Washington D.C. RMO3 asserted that the Agency faced serious operating challenges in 2016 and 2017, and management made the decision to relocate all staff to Washington, D.C. as a result. On September 29, 2016, Complainant responded to management’s relocation orders. He noted that it would have several negative effects on him and his family, such as his wife’s loss of employment; loss of familial support system, both in terms of care he receives and care he provides; and loss of his medical network and treatment for his current cancer diagnosis. On November 4, 2016, Complainant sent an email to the Senior Labor Management & Employee Relations Advisor (RMO4) stating that he would like reconsideration for the relocation order. He noted that his previous email was seemingly ignored, and no one appeared to be concerned for his wellbeing. Complainant suggested a temporary position in Miami to which he thought he could be reassigned. Specifically, Complainant explained that there was another Federal agency that had a Trade Promotion Cooperation Committee (TPCC). Complainant noted that he was TPCC-trained and thought that the Agency might be able to temporarily assign him to work with this agency, noting that the other agency would of course, have to accept him. He acknowledged that it was unconventional as it was with another agency but noted that he felt best if he could remain in Florida. Complainant also noted that, barring reassignment to another agency, perhaps the Agency could locate any other position for him in the Miami area. On November 9, 2016, management responded that the details for the transfer were previously provided, and Complainant was expected to report for duty on February 6, 2017 as part of a permanent transfer. There was no response to Complainant’s suggestion of a reassignment to a temporary position in Miami at another agency, or consideration for reassignment to any other Agency positions remaining, if any, in Miami. That same day, Complainant responded. Complainant noted that no one had addressed his concerns or provided any consideration to possible alternative solutions besides a permanent transfer to Washington, D.C. Complainant asserted that someone was making the decision to permanently transfer him despite knowing how detrimental it would be to him, or was doing so to force him into resigning. On January 17, 2017, Complainant requested as a reasonable accommodation to postpone the change of his permanent duty station for at least 90 days to receive ADT treatment for his cancer. On January 24, 2017, the Vice President and Chief Human Capital Officer (RMO5) responded to Complainant’s postponement request. The letter noted that Complainant was initially informed on September 27, 2016, and that he had had approximately five months to prepare for relocation. The Agency noted that the effective relocation date was supposed to be February 6, 2017 but allowed for an extension to February 20, 2017. On January 31, 2017, Complainant responded to RMO5, and submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA-3) form. Complainant requested to remain in the Miami Regional Office. Complainant stated that he is able to perform all of the essential functions of his position, and that it was not necessary for him to be physically located in Washington, D.C. Complainant asserted that his suggested accommodation, to remain in Florida, would allow him to perform the essential functions of his position while allowing him to stay within his medical and familial networks; continue his ADT treatments; and minimize the negative effects of his diagnosis. Complainant asserted that living alone in the Washington, D.C. area would have deleterious health effects. Complainant’s request to remain was denied. On or about February 20, 2017, Complainant relocated to Washington, D.C. On March 31, 2017, and at the suggestion of RMO4, Complainant submitted a formal request for a medical evaluation by Federal Occupational Health Service (FOHS) to return to his former duty station in Miami, Florida. On April 17, 2017, the FOHS Doctor, who reviewed Complainant’s medical records and communicated with his doctors in Florida, mistakenly believed that Complainant was still residing in Florida. With this belief, the FOHS doctor stated: If moving him to Washington is administratively imperative, I would recommend waiting at least six months to see if his medical condition stabilizes. If he is less symptomatic at that time a transfer would be possible. If it is impossible for him to perform the essential functions of his position from Florida, a readjustment of his duties, a change in position, or a medical disability retirement could all be considered. On April 18, 2017, the FOHS Doctor updated his response, noting that he mistakenly believed Complainant was still in Florida at the time. He stated that because Complainant was already in D.C., he could “continue working here with the two-day teleworking accommodation. He should transfer his care to a local urologist and FOH will be happy to review his case again if there is any change in his condition.” Complainant noted the marked tone changes and felt that RMO4 had pressured the FOHS Doctor to change his review. On June 22, 2017, RMO5 denied Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request to relocate to Florida. The denial stated that the accommodation would be ineffective and require the removal of an essential function. The denial noted that once FOHS was corrected about Complainant’s residence, the medical team found that Complainant could transfer his care and continue working in D.C. with the approval of some telework days. The denial provided that the maximum telework days were two per week. The Vice President of the Finance Division (RMO6) 4 stated that the Agency denied the request. By the time the investigation began, RMO6 had retired. The EEO Investigator noted that she did not attempt to contact RMO6 as her expected testimony was likely duplicative of testimony provided by other named responsible management officials. However, in August 2018, the RMO6 testified that Complainant’s request was denied because management was not able to relocate the essential functions of the Loan Specialist to Miami, FL. Instead, management offered Complainant a telework agreement for a maximum of two days per week, but this was not accepted by Complainant. Regarding Complainant’s earlier reassignment suggestion, management determined that the two day telework offer was sufficient as any kind of reassignment was not feasible. The Agency noted that the two days telework would have allowed Complainant to continue to perform the essential functions of his position. On June 30, 2017, Complainant submitted a request for reconsideration of the June 22, 2017 denial of his reasonable accommodation request. Complainant argued that the two-day telework schedule was an ineffective accommodation. On July 21, 2017, the Agency denied Complainant’s request for reconsideration of the denial of his reasonable accommodation request. The denial stated that the Agency stood by its previous determinations to deny Complainant’s request to relocate to Florida. On August 4, 2017, Complainant emailed the Chief Human Capital Officer (RMO7), RMO4 and RMO5, and submitted an appeal for the denial of his reconsideration of his reasonable accommodation request. On August 16, 2017, Complainant was informed that the appeal of his denied reasonable accommodation request also was denied. Complainant maintained that RMO4 and RMO7 denied the appeal of his reasonable accommodation request because they asserted that Complainant could not perform the essential job functions of his position if he were not at the Washington, D.C. office. The denial also noted that since Complainant was already living and working in Washington, D.C., he could continue working with the two-day teleworking accommodation. The Agency asserted that Complainant could also transfer his care to D.C. and establish a new medical network. RMO4 asserted that Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request, to relocate to his original duty station in Miami, Florida, would have allowed Complainant to perform some but not all essential functions of his position. RMO4 asserted that some functions required Complainant to be present at Agency headquarters. RMO4 asserted that the Agency did make an individual assessment of Complainant. The record indicates that the assessment referred to may have been the independent medical assessment conducted by the FOHS. After reviewing his position description and his reasonable accommodation application, management determined Complainant was able to perform the essential functions of his position with a reasonable accommodation of allowing Complainant to telework up to two days per week, but not an accommodation of full time telework. See Supplemental Report of Investigation at 115-24. due to undue hardship 5. Thus, during the investigation, RMO4 chose not to delineate the additional factors necessary to justify a denial pursuant to an undue hardship analysis. Instead, both RMO4 and RMO5 testified that due to the realignment and relocation of Complainant’s position, Complainant would be unable to perform seven of the nineteen essential functions of his position from Florida. Both officials detailed the following essential functions that could not be performed from a residence or office in Florida: 7. Under management guidance and supervision, conducts user acceptance testing and validates system functionality and usability upgrades on the online system. 8. Conducts site visits to assist exporters in understanding their insurance policy and to assess the exporter’s industry, receivables portfolio, and ability to make credit decisions. 11. Assists the division Director or Senior Portfolio Manager in preparing briefings for Senior Management of relevant case, industry and country developments and status of impaired assets. Portfolio Manager coordinates with the Credit Policy Division, Country Risk and Economic Analysis Division (CREA), Policy and Planning and other divisions as necessary in the preparation of briefing memos on specific transactions or country developments. 12. Participates in internal work groups that evaluate and make recommendations regarding improvements in [Agency] programs, policies or processes, as required. 13. Represent the [Agency] at interagency meetings to discuss and coordinate government policy and issues. Speak at public conferences on [Agency] programs, as well as on geographic or sector-specific topics. Such conferences may include participants from U.S. and foreign companies, multilateral institutions, foreign governments, other export credit agencies, and exporter or bank industry groups. Accompany Business Development Officers on new business meetings with external customers. 14. May travel to foreign countries in order to perform due diligence on specific cases, monitor loan portfolio, gain market knowledge and promote [Agency] programs. In his prior affidavit dated December 11, 2017, RMO4 indicated that Complainant’s requested reasonable accommodation, of relocating back to Miami, Florida would have imposed an undue hardship on the Agency’s operations. Assists in the cross-training of junior specialists and colleagues on division products, underwriting principles and the online system. Reviews the work of program management assistants and other staff. While these functions were listed as essential to Complainant’s position, there is no indication that these were newly added to Complainant’s role when he relocated. During the investigation, RMO6 stated that Complainant’s position description did not change with the relocation or the Agency’s realignment plan. The only aspect that changed was that management now determined he could not perform those seven essential functions from Florida. However, prior to the relocation, it appeared that Complainant was successfully performing such functions while he lived and worked in Florida. Complainant also refuted management’s response. Complainant noted that he had no issues performing his position in the past, noting that he also had a two-day telework schedule while in Florida. Complainant asserted that the two-day telework could have that could easily expanded to a full week as an accommodation. Claim 2 The record contained a copy of Complainant’s Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 performance evaluation. In FY 2013, Complainant was under a different chain of supervision. His then-first-line supervisor (S1) detailed that Complainant was “very thorough in his analysis and strives to conduct a review that is free of unknown risk factors.” S1 also noted that Complainant frequently worked on very complex and high-level credit experience reviews. S1 further noted that “[w]orking remotely on a daily basis 6 can pose challenges, but [Complainant] has made a conscientious effort to remain in communication with headquarters 7 via phone and email dialogue.” On November 18, 2013, S1 rated Complainant as “Excellent Performer” for FY 2013. In FY 2014, S1 stated that Complainant was “Fully Effective.” In her evaluation of Complainant, S1 stated: As has been the case on prior reviews, [Complainant’s] analytical skills are highly comprehensive and detail-orientated. He is adept at rectifying participant information that requires correction and/or updating and often leaves no issue unresolved, almost to a fault at times. The [Southeast Florida] territory, although very challenging, is also plagued by very high volume and often times requires The record indicates that Complainant had an approved two-day telework arrangement while working for the Agency’s Miami office. It is unclear if he had, at some point, shifted to a full- time telework schedule while living in Miami. It is unclear from the record if S1’s references of “headquarters” refers to the Washington, D.C. Agency headquarters or the Agency’s Miami regional headquarters. the greatest of skill in balancing how much time and review to devote to each individual credit in order to determine a reasonable assurance of repayment while still meeting the constant demands of transaction flow and customer service….This continued to be a challenge during the recent evaluation period, although [Complainant] was more conscientious of this issue and thus some improvement was noted. S1 stated that Complainant worked well within the Southeast Florida Team; always accepted new assignments willingly; always properly documented his work; and, provided well-supported arguments for his recommendations. The FY 2014 evaluation was signed on October 21, 2015 by S1. Complainant’s second line supervisor (S2) signed off on the review on November 2, 2015. At the time, S1 supervised the Southeast (SE) Florida Region from November 2014 to May 2015. S1 noted that during the FY 2014, she was realigned to a new territory, while Complainant remained in the SE area reporting to a new manager. It is indicated that S1 also provided the FY 2015 evaluation, but the record does not contain a copy. The FY 2016 evaluation noted that there had not been a mid-year review for that year, but that management discussed concerns with Complainant through the year. At the time of the evaluation, Complainant was still based in Miami, Florida, but S1 was no longer his supervisor. Instead, RMO1 was the rating official, with the Deputy Vice President (RMO8) as the second line supervisor. RMO1 noted that Complainant’s productivity was the “lowest of any full-time employee in the TCI group.” RMO1 noted that efficiency was a recurring issue for Complainant, but this was not mentioned in the FY 2013 or 2014 evaluation. On November 16, 2016, RMO1 signed the evaluation, assigning Complainant a “Needs Improvement” rating. That same day, RMO8 also concurred. On May 15, 2017, Complainant was provided a mid-year review. On May 30, 2017, Complainant received an email from RMO1 that detailed the mid-year review. RMO1 noted that while Complainant had improved in some areas, he still struggled in many areas. On October 5, 2017, Complainant received an “Unacceptable” evaluation rating for FY 2017. At the time, Complainant had relocated to Washington, D.C., but still worked on files for the Florida territory. The FY 2017 evaluation noted that because Complainant was given a “Needs Improvement” rating for FY 2016, he was placed on a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP). It noted that Complainant had improved in some areas and failed to improve in several other areas. RMO1 was the rating official for FY 2017 and detailed several areas where he asserted that Complainant struggled with. Ultimately, RMO1 determined that Complainant’s work was “Unacceptable” and signed the evaluation on October 5, 2017, with RMO8 concurring on October 21, 2017. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). On February 23, 2018, Complainant requested a Final Agency Decision (FAD). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency had subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
