S013-09

Investigative record summary (background section of a published federal-sector EEO appellate decision; outcome text removed).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Registered Nurse in the 4 East Medical-Surgical Unit at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) in West Los Angeles, California. During the relevant time, Complainant’s first level supervisor was the Nurse Manager for the 4 East Medical-Surgical Unit (S1). Complainant’s first line supervisor, the Nurse Manager 4 East (S1), demanded that Complainant work twelve-hour shifts, which Complainant refused. 2 2. In May 2018, S1 stated in front of coworkers that because the Agency canceled her surgery, she should go to another hospital for services, thereby disclosing her confidential medical information in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. 3 3. During January 2019, Complainant was required to work with coworkers who had improperly accessed her confidential medical records without authorization. 4. During January 2019, management failed to resolve Complainant’s sick leave issues in a timely manner. 5. On March 5, 2019, Complainant’s coworker referred to her as “a 50-year-old mental patient.” 6. On May 1, 2019, S1 told Complainant’s coworker, who was allegedly bullying and harassing Complainant, not to worry and that she “had her back.” 7. On May 1, 2019, Complainant was accused of being intimidating and aggressive and was accused of engaging in harassing behavior by a coworker who was bullying Complainant. 8. On May 3, 2019, Complainant was accused of sending an email from another employee’s email account. 9. On May 3, 2019, S1 requested that Complainant sign a misconduct form. 10. On May 28, 2019, S1 paced in front of Complainant’s work area. 11. On May 28, 2019, S1 accused her of misconduct. 12. On June 6, 2019, an unnamed employee interfered with Complainant’s privacy violation investigation. 13. On August 20, 2019, Complainant discovered an article posted on the report table about nurses with mental disabilities, which she thought was directed at her. Originally this claim was listed as “management refused to change Complainant’s schedule to 12-hour shifts.” However, the Agency noted Complainant stated that she did not request to work 12-hour shifts, and S1 “demanded that she switch from 8 to 12 hours.” In a supplemental affidavit, Complainant stated this event did not happen in May 2018, but that it occurred in November or December 2017. 14. On unspecified dates, S1 “split the staff against each other” and did not properly resolve issues that occurred on the floor. The Agency’s Office of Resolution Management (ORM) issued a Notice of Partial Acceptance dismissing a portion of claim 7 in which Complainant claimed that she was accused of engaging in harassing behavior by a coworker, for failure to state a claim. The Agency accepted the remaining claims. The Agency noted that claim 1 constituted a timely raised independently actionable claim and was also part of the harassment claim. Further, the Agency stated claims 2, 3, and 12 were accepted for investigation as discrete events under the confidentiality provisions of the Rehabilitation Act, not as a violation of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act or the Privacy Act. The Agency accepted the remaining claims for investigation. Complainant noted that she was scheduled to have surgery at the VAMC and that it had been canceled several times. Complainant noted that each time her surgery was canceled, she had to redo her request for leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and have S1 sign the new form. Complainant stated that after the fourth time her surgery was canceled, in November or December 2017, she presented a new form for S1 to sign which she stated she presented to S1 in S1’s private office. Thereafter, Complainant stated that as S1 walked down the hallway between the reception station and the nurses’ station, S1 was talking loudly and said, “And you, you need to go somewhere else to have your surgery. If the VA is not taking care of you, you need to go to UCLA.” Complainant identified two witnesses to this event: Witness 1, who she stated heard S1 talking about her surgery and asked if she was okay; and Witness 13, who she stated was at the reception station and asked why S1 was telling everyone about her surgery. Further, Complainant stated that she overheard Witness 12 tell another coworker it was unfair for them to go through Complainant’s medical records and spread information throughout the ward. Complainant suspected employee(s) had improperly accessed her VAMC medical records. In April 2019, Complainant contacted the Privacy Office to request a printout of everyone who accessed her records for the past three years. She noted that she received a report in the mail. Upon review of the report, Complainant believed that several of the coworkers on the list accessed her medical records improperly and asked the Privacy Officer to investigate. She stated the Privacy Officer asked her to review the list and highlight the coworkers who accessed her record without being involved in her care while she was a patient. Complainant provided a printout of a list with four columns. The first column lists employees’ names; the second column lists dates and times; the third column lists notes such as “CPRSChart version 1, Appointment Management, Case No. Exam Edit, Register Patient, Clinical Scheduling;” and a fourth column lists “No” or “Yes.” Next to the first column is an arrow next to six names: Coworker 1, Coworker 2, Coworker 3, Coworker 4, Coworker 5, and Coworker 6. Next to the last column are handwritten notes indicating where the six employees with the arrow next to their names worked. The record contains a July 1, 2019 letter addressed to Complainant which was signed by the Privacy Officer on behalf of the Acting Director. The letter noted that on June 18, 2019, an email was received from Complainant stating that three coworkers: Coworker 2 (Nurse), Coworker 3 (Nurse), and Coworker 4 (Nurse) inappropriately accessed her medical record based upon the Sensitive Patient Access Report (SPAR) provided by their office on April 12, 2019. The letter stated during the fact-finding process, they discovered that “Ms. [Coworker 4], Ms. [blank] inappropriately accessed your medical record outside of her duties and responsibilities and had no valid reason to access your medical records.” The letter stated the other employees Complainant identified on the SPAR report as having inappropriately accessed her medical records, “did so within their job responsibilities.” The letter stated the employee’s supervisory staff were notified and it was “recommended the employee’s immediately retake the mandatory privacy and security training.” S1 stated that in response to Complainant’s April 9, 2019 email alleging that a coworker had possibly accessed her medical records, S1 immediately initiated an inquiry with the Privacy Officer to verify if a coworker had violated Complainant’s right to privacy by looking at her medical record. S1 stated that it was discovered that coworkers had violated Complainant’s privacy. S1 stated that two coworkers that were working with Complainant received disciplinary action. S1 provided documentation regarding discipline for two employees. Specifically, the record contains a letter from the Acting Director to an unidentified addressee dated September 4, 2019. The letter has a handwritten notation of “Employee 1” and indicates that a decision has been made to uphold the proposed suspension of seven calendar days for a Privacy Act Violation. The record also contains a letter from the Acting Director to an unidentified addressee dated September 5, 2019. The letter has a handwritten notation of “Employee 2” and notes a decision has been made to mitigate the proposed suspension of seven days to a one-day suspension for a Privacy Act Violation. The record contains a Privacy Investigation Report noting that on April 8, 2019, Complainant requested a SPAR and identified six employees that either currently work with her or on inpatient ward 4EAB or that worked with her on 4EAB in the past, that she believed inappropriately accessed her CPRS medical records outside of their job responsibilities. The report noted that Complainant also alleged that “her supervisor mentioned her surgery during the presence of other staff during a shift change and in meetings.” It was noted that Complainant had surgery on June 26, 2018. The report found that out of the six employees identified by Complainant, two currently working on 4E were determined to have inappropriately accessed Complainant’s medical record outside their duties and responsibilities. It was noted that Coworker 4 accessed Complainant’s medical records on June 15, 2018. The report noted that Coworker 4 said that “everyone was talking about [Complainant’s] surgery, including she and another employee that she witnessed accessing [Complainant’s] medical record under her [Coworker 4’s] access.” The report noted Coworker 4 did not have a valid reason for accessing Complainant’s medical record and that her actions were intentional. The report also stated that Coworker 3 currently worked on ward 4EAD had accessed Complainant’s medical records six times throughout 2018 and 2019. According to the report, Coworker 3 stated she wanted to check the schedule because Complainant had written her up on several occasions and she did not want to work on the same shift as Complainant. The report noted that Coworker 3 did not have a valid reason for accessing Complainant’s medical records and that “scheduling information is not located in CPRS therefore accessing this information is not for scheduling purposes and was intentional.” Further, it was noted that “[Coworker 4] and other employees stated that [Complainant] mentioned to them that ‘she was having surgery.’” The report stated that no evidence was found to confirm that Complainant’s supervisor disclosed any information regarding her surgery in any meeting. At the conclusion of the EEO investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing but subsequently withdrew her request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In its final decision, the Agency adopted the ORM’s decision to dismiss Complainant’s claim that on May 1, 2019, a coworker asserted that Complainant had subjected the coworker to harassment by being intimidating and aggressive. The Agency noted that the claim was accepted for consideration in Complainant’s overall harassment claim. The Agency addressed claims 1, 2, 3, and 12 under a disparate treatment theory. Regarding claim 1, the Agency noted the undisputed evidence showed Complainant remained on her eight- hour tour of duty at all times. The Agency found this claim was not supported by the record. Further, the Agency stated even accepting her claim as true, there was no indication of discriminatory motive. Regarding claim 2, Complainant claimed that S1 made a statement about her seeking surgery at another facility in an area where others could overhear S1’s statement, thereby disclosing her confidential medical information in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. The Agency noted that S1 stated she only discussed Complainant’s surgery with Complainant privately to offer her emotional support and argued there was no evidence beyond Complainant’s subjective testimony that anyone overheard the statement. The Agency noted the six coworkers who were interviewed as part of Complainant’s privacy investigation all confirmed that S1 did not disclose any information about Complainant’s surgery or any other confidential medical information to them. Instead, the Agency stated, they learned of Complainant’s surgery from Complainant sharing the information directly. The Agency noted Complainant admitted in her testimony that she told at least one coworker that she was going to have surgery, but it had been canceled. The Agency concluded that Complainant did not show that S1 improperly disclosed her confidential medical information. The Agency stated even if it credited Complainant’s version of the incident and assumed that others overheard the statement, of which it stated there was no evidence, the vague reference allegedly made by S1 did not disclose confidential medical information. Regarding claim 3, the Agency noted the Commission has held that allegations that the Privacy Act has been violated were not within the purview of the EEOC Regulations, without a further allegation that the Privacy Act violation resulted from prohibited discrimination. The Agency stated that Complainant did not provide evidence of discriminatory animus due to her disability, and the privacy investigation determined that the two coworkers who accessed her records did so to find out when she would be out for surgery, and because one of them did not want to work when Complainant was working. The Agency found no indication and no evidence was provided by Complainant of any discriminatory motivation or wrongdoing beyond the Privacy Act violation. Regarding claim 12, the Agency stated there was no indication of any alleged “resistance” from Complainant’s coworkers during the Privacy Investigation, or that even if accepted as true, any such resistance was based on discriminatory animus. The Agency noted S1 promptly reported Complainant’s concern that her privacy had been violated to the Privacy Office, a privacy investigation was conducted, and all the employees Complainant identified as potentially accessing her medical records were interviewed, and two employees were identified as having improperly accessed her records. The Agency noted those employees were subsequently disciplined and ordered to retake privacy training. The Agency stated there was no evidence that the failure to take other disciplinary measures was due to discriminatory animus. Regarding the hostile work environment claim, the Agency stated even accepting Complainant’s allegations as true, she has presented no evidence she was singled out for treatment based on her disability. The Agency noted Witness 1, who has not worked for the Agency since 2018, provided only a vague statement that S1 allegedly told him Complainant was having “mental issues,” which was contradicted by S1’s testimony. The Agency stated S1 was unaware Complainant had a disability, and although she noted Complainant had taken bereavement leave after the death of a parent, to S1’s knowledge, it was not related to any mental or other disability. The Agency noted Witness 2’s statement gave no indication of S1 having discriminatory animus against Complainant based on her disability. The Agency noted that both witnesses expressed personal complaints about S1, rendering their statements less credible. The Agency found Complainant failed to show that she was subjected to unlawful harassment based on her disability.
