{"conditions":{"rc1":{"status":"review","note":"The record traces allegations, the fact-finding report, and the Agency's no-discrimination finding, but the Agency's final decision is stated only as a bare conclusion with no reasoning linking the evidence to it."},"rc2":{"status":"review","note":"Most characterizations are attributed to Complainant, CW1, Manager, the Inspector, or coworkers, but the Inspector's 'conjecture' remark and the coworker statements lack record citations, and nothing identifies the source for the claim that CW1 and other women were not disciplined while men were."},"rc3":{"status":"review","note":"Key dates are given (Nov. 24, Dec. 21, Dec. 30, Dec. 31, Jan. 5, Jan. 22, Feb. 2, July 22, 2021), but Claim 3 is undated ('sometime after'), Claim 2 is missing, the dates of the affidavits, report of investigation, and final decision are not given, and the sequence is partly out of order."},"rc4":{"status":"gap","note":"The Agency's final decision does not identify the decision-maker, the legal standard or criteria applied, or whether Complainant's criticisms of the investigation (bias, unreviewed security footage) were considered before it was finalized."},"rc5":{"status":"gap","note":"Because the final decision's basis, decision-maker, and criteria are absent and the cited evidence is only summarized, an independent reviewer could not assess from this record alone whether the conclusion is supported."}},"missing":["dates","record_citations","decision_maker","criteria","responses_considered","other"],"reason":"The narrative gives a reasonably detailed account of the complaint, the investigation, and the procedural history with named roles. However, the Agency's final finding of no discrimination or reprisal is stated as a bare conclusion. It does not say who made the decision, what standard was applied, how the evidence was weighed, or whether Complainant's objections (biased investigation, unreviewed security footage, disparate discipline) were addressed. Citations to the underlying report, affidavits, and statements are absent, Claim 2 is missing, Claim 3 is undated, and the dates of the affidavits, report of investigation, and final decision are not given, so a later reviewer could not reconstruct how the decision was reached from this record alone."}