              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                           Diego V.,1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Megan J. Brennan,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                         (Pacific Area),
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2019005155

                                    Appeal No. 0120180076

                                   Agency No. 4F920006916

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120180076 (June 18, 2019). EEOC
regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to reconsider any
previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting
party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant worked as a Full-Time City Carrier at the Post Office in Indio, California.
Complainant has since retired. Complainant filed an EEO complaint, which he amended five
times, alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to harassment on
the bases of disability (diabetes) and reprisal. In support of his claims, Complainant raised 17
allegations that included, but were not limited to, requests for medical documentation for
absences, a Letter of Warning, leave issues, an Official Discussion, being criticized and
questioned by management, being required to work beyond his medical restrictions, being denied



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019005155

reasonable accommodation, being subjected to an Investigative Interview, and the denial of his
request to opt on a route.

Complainant did not request a hearing. Our prior appellate decision affirmed the Agency’s final
decision that concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination or harassment as alleged. The decision found that the Agency articulated
legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for its actions which Complainant did not prove were a
pretext for discrimination. Although Complainant stated that some of the management officials
lied, the decision noted that Complainant did not request a hearing, so we do not have the benefit
of an Administrative Judge’s credibility findings. The decision found that the Agency did not fail
to provide Complainant with reasonable accommodation. As to his claims of harassment, the
decision found that all of the incidents, taken together, were not sufficiently severe or pervasive
to establish a hostile work environment. Moreover, Complainant failed to prove that his
disability or retaliatory animus played any role in the events at issue.

In his request for reconsideration, Complainant expresses his disagreement with the previous
decision. We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the
Commission. See EEO MD-110, Ch. 9, § VII.A. Rather, a reconsideration request is an
opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation
of material fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations
of the Agency. Complainant has not done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120180076 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs.
                                                  3                                     2019005155

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request
the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court
costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has
the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time
limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 19, 2019
Date
