              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Harlan P., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Robert Wilkie,
                                           Secretary,
                                 Department of Veterans Affairs
                                (Veterans Health Administration),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002209

                                 Hearing No. 430-2016-00191X

                              Agency No. 2004-0652-2015103878

                                           DECISION

On January 18, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 26, 2018, final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
MODIFIES and REMANDS the Agency’s final order for further processing.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented concern whether the Agency subjected Complainant to a hostile work
environment on the bases of race and reprisal when two Agency employees made racially charged
comments about Complainant, whether the Agency discriminatorily failed to select Complainant
for three vacancy announcements and whether the Agency improperly disclosed his EEO activity.


                                        BACKGROUND



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2019002209

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Maintenance Worker,
WG-08 at the Agency’s Richmond VA Medical Center in Richmond, Virginia.

On July 18, 2015, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of race (African-American) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when:

       1. On September 14, 2014, management was provided a copy of a CD in which the
          General Foreman for Engineering Services referred to African-Americans as
          “buckwheats”;

       2. On February 4, 2015, the local news station aired a video of the General Foreman
          making racial comments and referring to African-Americans as “buckwheats,” and
          Complainant believes that the General Foreman was referring to him as such;

       3. On June 8, 2015, Complainant was not selected for the position of Pipefitter, VVG-
          4204-10, Vacancy Announcement VHA-652-15-MVM-130811-BU;

       4. On June 11, 2015, Complainant was not selected for any of the four Maintenance
          Mechanic, WG-4749-09, positions advertised in vacancy announcements VHA-652-
          15-MVM-1321753-BU (two positions) and VHA-652-15-MVM-1322213-BU (two
          positions);

       5. On June 23, 2015, the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor, looked at Complainant and
          said, “Look at [Complainant] sitting there, looking like a raccoon eating shit”; and

       6. On November 10, 2015, Complainant was not selected for the position of Maintenance
          Mechanic, vacancy number ANS-15-DKO-15000447-BU.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing,
which the assigned AJ held on October 5, 2018. Following the hearing, the AJ issued a decision
in favor of the Agency on November 26, 2018.

With regard to claims 1 and 2, the AJ addressed Complainant’s allegation that the General Foreman
had subjected him to a hostile work environment by making the following comments about him
and three of his African American colleagues:

       You don’t interview by yourself, then they hired two fucking white guys. So he interviewed
       all these fucking self [sic] like he’s Billy Bad Ass. And the other fucking buckwheats and
       my God, so they filed a fucking suit and they won them too. So, now, I’m going to fucking
       end up with every one of them.
                                                3                                    2019002209

See AJ’s Decision at 7-8; see also Report of Investigation (ROI) at 24 and 33.

While the AJ acknowledged that the General Foreman did not refer to anyone by name in the
video, the AJ inferred that the General Foreman was referring to Complainant and three of
Complainant’s African American colleagues because the General Foreman’s “ill-mannered and
racially derogatory language reference[d] (1) Complainant’s prior EEO complainant [sic] (‘suit
and they won them too’) and (2) the settlement (‘I’m going to fucking end up with every one of
them’).” The AJ noted that Complainant had ended up under the General Foreman’s supervision
because of an EEO settlement with the Agency. Given these factors, the AJ found that “the
statements that [the General Foreman] made in the video are unquestionably about Complainant
and his three other colleagues.”

Nevertheless, the AJ found that no liability could attach to the Agency because the record showed
that when Complainant reported the video to the Medical Center Director and Chief of Human
Resources Management Services on September 14, 2014, they took prompt and effective action
against the General Foreman. Specifically, the AJ found that the Medical Center Director
immediately relieved the General Foreman of his supervisory responsibilities, transferred him to
another department, and ultimately issued the General Foreman a 10-day suspension following an
internal investigation. 2 The AJ concluded that:

       Given the Agency’s prompt remedial action to remove [the General Foreman] from
       Complainant’s chain of supervision and transfer him to a different department, the racially
       derogatory term that [the General Foreman] used to reference Complainant and his
       colleagues (“buckwheats”) was not sufficient to affect the conditions of employment of the
       Complainant.

See AJ’s Decision at 8.

For claim 5, the AJ found that while it was inappropriate for the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor
to refer to Complainant as a possum/raccoon, the AJ concluded that such reference was not
discriminatory given the context it was made. In this regard, the AJ noted that on the day of the
alleged incident, one of Complainant’s colleagues (C1) showed Complainant’s work crew a picture
of his (C1) wife’s genitals. The AJ found that the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor made the
raccoon/possum statement to Complainant while the members of the work crew, including
Complainant, were laughing and joking about the picture. While the AJ acknowledged
Complainant’s contention that the raccoon/possum comment constituted a hostile work
environment, the AJ found no evidence that either Complainant or the union representative
reported the comment to management. 3



2
  The Director also directed the General Foreman to take a series of cultural diversity training
courses.
3
  We note that Complainant stipulated that he did not report the alleged raccoon/possum comment
to any management official. See Joint Stipulations dated September 20, 2018 at 4.
                                                 4                                      2019002209

Furthermore, the AJ found that Complainant “sat on and waited to address this inappropriate
comment with [the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor] until it became beneficial for him during a
discussion of his performance evaluation.” At that time, the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor
presented Complainant with a “fully successful” rating; however, when Complainant brought up
the inappropriate comment, the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor apologized for the comment
and raised Complainant’s performance evaluation from “fully successful” to “excellent.” The AJ
concluded that “Complainant was not someone who was subject[ed] to a hostile work environment
but was instead someone who took advantage of a disparaging comment to obtain a more
substantial performance award.” The AJ also found that even assuming arguendo that the
inappropriate comment was indeed discriminatory, given the isolated nature of the comment, it
was not sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the terms, conditions, or privileges of
Complainant’s employment.

The AJ also found that “the record and Complainant’s testimony also revealed that Complainant
perceived a clear distinction between ‘racial’ comments (‘buckwheats’) and other denigrating
comments (‘raccoon/possum’).” In this regard, the AJ noted that “[i]n claims 1 and 2, Complainant
immediately reported the incident and video to the Medical Center Director and Chief of Human
Resources Management Services,” whereas for the raccoon/possum comment, Complainant
amended his EEO complaint and brought up the comment to the Maintenance Mechanic
Supervisor during his performance evaluation. The AJ reasoned that “[t]hese differences further
indicate that Complainant may not have perceived the raccoon/possum statement as derogatory,
but rather part of inappropriate ‘joking’ between him and his colleagues.” For these reasons, the
AJ concluded that “although Complainant has offered some evidence suggesting his supervisor,
[the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor], made a disparaging comment, Complainant has failed to
demonstrate that this comment amounted to hostility in his workplace sufficient to support a claim
[of a] hostile work environment.”

As for claims 3, 4, and 6, concerning Complainant’s non-selection claims, the AJ found that the
Agency did not discriminatorily fail to select Complainant for any of the three positions.

For claim 3, the AJ found that Complainant was not selected for the Pipefitter position because he
did not score high enough to move beyond the telephonic interview stage. In this regard, the AJ
noted that out of the eighteen questions asked during the interview, Complainant was only able to
answer one of the questions correctly, and he received partial credit for two of the questions.
Ultimately, Complainant received nine points out of 85 possible points. In contrast, the selectee
received 72.75 points. The AJ found that the Agency’s characterization of the selectee as the most
qualified candidate was substantiated by not only the selectee’s interview scores, but also the
selectee’s experience and qualifications. Specifically, the AJ found that the selectee had superior
qualifications because the selectee “participated in Local 10’s Plumbers Pipefitters Apprenticeship
Program and had seven years of experience as a pipefitter before applying for the position
compared to Complainant’s three years of experience as a maintenance worker at the Agency and
plumbing engineering training he received at the Richmond Technical Center.” Moreover, the AJ
noted that while Complainant’s resume stated that he had been a Maintenance Worker since April
2006, he did not technically begin that position until after the July 2011 settlement. Given that the
                                                 5                                     2019002209

selectee had been a Pipefitter for seven years prior to applying for the Pipefitter position, the AJ
concluded that the Agency did not discriminatorily fail to select Complainant.

With regard to claim 4, the AJ found that Complainant was not selected for the Maintenance
Mechanic position because Complainant was not best qualified for the position. Specifically, the
AJ found that the Agency had conducted a telephonic interview of all candidates who made the
certification list. During the interview phase, the selection panel asked Complainant, along with
28 other candidates, 10 trade related questions. Out of the 10 questions, Complainant could only
partially answer three or four questions. The AJ found that Complainant’s low score prevented
him from moving forward in the selection process. Moreover, in comparing the resumes of the
selectees and Complainant, the AJ concluded that the selectees’ resumes matched the position
description for the vacancy and had more years of experience, whereas Complainant had less years
of experience and no on-point experience.

For claim 6, the AJ also found that Complainant’s non-selection was due to his failure to score
well during the telephonic interview phase. In this regard, the AJ noted that Complainant was
asked to answer 10 trade related questions, which were different from the questions asked in claim
4. Complainant, however, did not receive full credit for any of the questions. Due to Complainant’s
low scores, he did not proceed beyond the telephonic interview phase to the practical application
phase. The AJ found that the selectees, in contrast, had significantly higher telephonic interview
scores compared to Complainant. The AJ also addressed Complainant’s concern that the
Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor who likened him to raccoon/possum may have unduly
influenced the selection process. However, the AJ found that Complainant would still have a total
score far below that of the selectee, even if the score that the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor
had given Complainant was removed. Therefore, the AJ concluded that the Agency did not
discriminatorily fail to select Complainant.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. This appeal followed

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

We shall address Complainant’s contentions on appeal, infra. The Agency, in response, requests
that the Commission affirm its final order implementing the AJ’s finding of no discrimination on
all claims.
                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), all post-hearing factual findings by an AJ will be upheld if
supported by substantial evidence in the record. Substantial evidence is defined as “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.” Universal
Camera Corp. v. National Labor Relations Board, 340 U.S. 474, 477 (1951) (citation omitted). A
finding regarding whether or not discriminatory intent existed is a factual finding. See Pullman-
Standard Co. v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 293 (1982). An AJ's conclusions of law are subject to a de
novo standard of review, whether or not a hearing was held.
                                                 6                                     2019002209


An AJ’s credibility determination based on the demeanor of a witness or on the tone of voice of a
witness will be accepted unless documents or other objective evidence so contradicts the testimony
or the testimony so lacks in credibility that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it. See EEOC
Management Directive 110, Chapter 9, at § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

We begin with claims 1, 2, and 5, wherein Complainant alleges that the Agency subjected him to
a hostile work environment when the General Foreman and Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor
made racially charged comments towards him.

On appeal, Complainant contends that “[c]ontrary to the Judge’s findings, there is no question
these remarks are sufficient to be actionable and the idea that the Agency took prompt action makes
no sense.” Complainant maintains that the remarks “were specifically in relation to [his] prior case
and the Agency was well aware from that case of [the General Foreman’s] attitudes” and that the
comments “were also disseminated via the video at some point as well.” He contends that for “the
purposes of harassment, the actions are more than enough to warrant a finding” because
Complainant “was subjected to two incidents, close in time and both exceptionally severe.”

To establish a claim of harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on his
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). The
harasser’s conduct should be evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the
victim’s circumstances. Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice
No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe and
pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working
environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993); see also Oncale v.
Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 23 U.S. 75 (1998).

With regard to Complainant’s allegations in claims 1 and 2, we agree with the AJ that Complainant
cannot impute liability for harassment to the Agency because the record clearly shows that upper
management took prompt and effective action to address the harassment when they became aware
of it. Specifically, by Complainant’s own admission, the Agency removed the General Foreman’s
supervisory authority over him in September 2014, “right after [Complainant] first viewed the
video.” See Complainant’s Deposition Transcript at 47-48. The record also shows that the Agency
initiated an internal investigation, and ultimately issued the General Foreman a 10-day suspension,
                                                 7                                      2019002209

effective January 4, 2015, for the misconduct. ROI at 394. 4 We find that these remedial actions
are sufficient for the Agency to avoid liability for the General Foreman’s actions.

However, our analysis does not end there. While the AJ expressly found that the alleged comments
were “unquestionably about Complainant and his three other colleagues” because the General
Foreman made references to Complainant’s prior EEO activity and settlement activity, the AJ did
not address whether the act of disclosing Complainant’s prior EEO activity amounted to reprisal.
In the interest of administrative economy, we shall do so in the first instance.

As a general matter, the statutory anti-retaliation provisions prohibit any adverse treatment that is
based on a retaliatory motive and is reasonably likely to deter a reasonable employee from
engaging in protected activity. Burlington N. and Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53 (2006).
Although petty slights and trivial annoyances are not actionable, adverse actions or threats to take
adverse actions such as reprimands, negative evaluations, and harassment are actionable.
Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004
(Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation), at § II. B. (Aug. 25, 2016).

Given the importance of maintaining “unfettered access to [the] statutory remedial mechanisms”
in the anti-retaliation provisions, we have found a broad range of actions to be retaliatory. For
example, we have held that a supervisor threatening an employee by saying, “What goes around,
comes around” when discussing an EEO complaint constitutes reprisal. Vincent v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120072908 (Aug. 3, 2009), req. for recons. den., EEOC Request No.
0520090654 (Dec. 16, 2010). We have also found that a supervisor attempting to counsel an
employee against pursuing an EEO complaint “as a friend,” even if intended innocently, is reprisal.
Woolf v. Dep’t of Energy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120083727 (June 4, 2009) (violation found when
a Labor Management Specialist told the complainant, “as a friend,” that her EEO claim would
polarize the office).

Similarly, the Commission has held that disclosure of EEO activity by a supervisor to coworkers
constitutes reprisal. Complainant v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0120132430 (July 9,
2015) (reprisal found where a supervisor broadcasted complainant’s EEO activity in the presence
of coworkers and management); see also Melodee M. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120180064 (June 14, 2019) (affirming agency’s finding of reprisal when complainant’s
second level supervisor disclosed complainant’s EEO activity to others). We have also found
reprisal where a human resources (HR) employee inadvertently negatively left a message on a
complainant’s voicemail regarding the settlement of a prior EEO complaint. Complainant v. Dep’t
of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0720120032 (May 1, 2014) (complainant subjected to retaliation
when a HR employee and coworker inadvertently left message on complainant’s work voicemail
berating her and using strong language while discussing settlement of complainant’s prior EEO
complaint).




4
    Management initially proposed the General Foreman’s removal. See Hearing Transcript at 127.
                                                 8                                      2019002209

Having reviewed the AJ’s decision, we find substantial evidence to support the AJ’s finding that
the General Foreman’s comments did indeed reference Complainant’s prior EEO filing and
settlement activity. As noted above, the AJ reasoned that the General Foreman’s comments
concerned Complainant’s prior EEO filing activity because the General Foreman made the remark,
“suit and they won them too.” With regard to Complainant’s prior EEO settlement activity, the AJ
reasoned that the remark, “I’m going to fucking end up with every one of them,” was in reference
to Complainant’s EEO settlement in 2011. As we find the AJ’s findings of fact and reasoning in
this regard to be logical and reasonable, we shall defer to them. Moreover, we find that a reasonable
employee would be deterred from engaging in protected EEO activity by a supervisor openly
expressing dismay and disgust at the prospect of ending up with employees who filed EEO suits
and won. Because we discern no legitimate basis as to why the General Foreman disclosed
Complainant’s prior EEO filing and settlement activity, we conclude that the Agency engaged in
reprisal against Complainant.

In reaching this conclusion, we are mindful that Complainant did not allege that he was subjected
to discrimination on the basis of reprisal when his supervisor disclosed his protected EEO activity.
Nevertheless, in our prior decisions, we have found reprisal even where a complainant did not
claim reprisal. For example, in Light v. Dep’t of Vet. Aff., EEOC Appeal No. 0120111229 (Nov.
22, 2011), the Commission affirmed the agency’s finding of reprisal when complainant’s second-
level supervisor admitted to telling complainant that she took offense at complainant’s complaints
about discrimination. req. for recons. den., EEOC Request No. 0520120207 (June 6, 2012).
Though the complainant in Light did not raise reprisal as a basis, the Commission affirmed the
agency’s finding that the evidence developed during the EEO investigation violated the “letter and
spirit of EEO law which requires agencies to promote and support the full realization of equal
employment opportunity.” As in Light, supra, we too conclude that the evidence in this case
manifestly demonstrates a violation of the “letter and spirit of EEO law which requires agencies
to promote and support the full realization of equal employment opportunity.” The only question
that remains for us to decide is the appropriate remedy.

To remedy findings of discrimination, the Commission is authorized to award compensatory
damages as part of “make whole” relief for a complainant. However, not all violations necessarily
entitle a complainant to individual relief. Vincent v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0120072908 (Aug. 3, 2009) (citing Binseel v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Request No. 05970584
(Oct. 8, 1998)). Rather, the action giving rise to the damages must be intentional. Id.

In this regard, our prior decisions establish that complainants are entitled to compensatory damages
for the unlawful disclosure of their EEO activity. For example, in Light, supra, we awarded
compensatory damages even though Complainant did not prevail on any of her individual claims
of discrimination. In rejecting the agency’s conclusion that complainant was not entitled to
compensatory damages because she did not prevail on her underlying claims, we expressly found
that the complainant was indeed entitled to compensatory damages because the agency’s actions
were likely to deter protected activity by complainant or others. Id.
                                                 9                                      2019002209

For the above reasons, we find that Complainant was subjected to unlawful reprisal in the
disclosure of his EEO activity by his supervisor and that compensatory damages may be awarded
should Complainant be able to show he suffered a compensable harm as a result of the disclosure.

With regard to claim 5, we find substantial evidence to support the AJ’s finding that the
Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor’s comment was not discriminatory. While the Commission has
long held that a single incident of a racial comparison to an animal may create a hostile work
environment, 5 we find this was not the case here given the full context of the remark. As noted in
the AJ’s decision, on the day of the alleged incident, C1 showed Complainant’s work crew a
picture of his (C1) wife’s genitals. While Complainant and his colleagues were joking around and
laughing at the picture, the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor made the comment, “Look at
[Complainant] sitting there, looking like a raccoon (possum) eating shit.” We note that during the
EEO investigation, the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor emphasized that he did not use the
word, “raccoon.” Rather, he compared Complainant to a “possum eating shit,” which he
maintained was an age old saying. ROI at 119-120. The Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor further
emphasized that he apologized to Complainant when Complainant raised his concerns with him.
Id. Given the totality of the record, we are simply not persuaded that the comment was in reference
to Complainant’s protected characteristics.

Disparate Treatment

We turn now to the merits of Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, which concern
Complainant's allegation that the Agency discriminatorily failed to select him for the positions at
issue in claims 3, 4, and 6.

For Complainant to prevail in a claim of disparate treatment, he must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima
facie case by demonstrating that he was subjected to an adverse employment action under
circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v.
Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576, 98 S. Ct. 2943, 57 L. Ed. 2d 957 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case
will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804 n. 14.

In the non-selection context, Complainant may establish a prima facie case of race and national
origin discrimination by showing that: 1) he is a member of a protected class; 2) he was qualified
for the position; 3) he was not selected for the position; and 4) he was accorded treatment different
from that given to persons otherwise similarly situated who are members outside of his protected
group. Williams v. Dep’t of Educ., EEOC Request No. 05970561, 98 FEOR (LRP) 3310 (Aug. 6,
1998).


5
 See EEOC’s Compliance Manual, Section 15 “Race and Color Discrimination”, No. 915.003,
15-38 (Apr. 19, 2006) (a single incident of a racial comparison to an animal may create a hostile
work environment); Sona B. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120180237 (Mar.
15, 2019) (addressed display of monkeys where Black employees felt display racist).
                                                10                                     2019002209

The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Aff. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d
207 (1981). Complainant must ultimately prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc.,
530 U.S. 133, 143, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509
U.S. 502, 519, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993); Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

This established order of analysis, in which the first step normally consists of determining the
existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the agency has articulated
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action at issue, the factual inquiry can
proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of whether
complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency's actions were
motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-
714, 103 S. Ct. 1478, 75 L. Ed. 2d 403 (1983); Hernandez v. Dep't of Transp., EEOC Request No.
05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep't of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Request No.
05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May
31, 1990).

For claim 3, the Agency maintained that Complainant was not selected for the position at issue
because he did not score high enough to proceed beyond the telephonic interview phase.
Specifically, Complainant had scored nine points out of 85 total points on the interview, whereas
the selectee received 72.75 points. ROI at 96, 100, and 107. The Administrative Officer who was
on the panel also added that this was the third time Complainant had applied for the position, and
that the first time Complainant applied, he could not solder or thread a pipe. Id. at 101. Another
member of the panel (Assistant Chief Engineer) added that the selectee was the best-qualified
candidate because his resume reflected seven years of pipefitting experience and an apprenticeship
program with a local union. Id. at 138.

With regard to the Maintenance Mechanic position in claim 4, the members of the interview panel
attributed Complainant’s low interview scores to his inability to demonstrate a basic knowledge
of carpentry. ROI at 8-9. Ultimately, Complainant received an average of 10.75 points out of 50
possible points, whereas the four selectees received average scores of 31 or higher. Id. at 215.
As for the claim 6, concerning another Maintenance Mechanic vacancy, the members of the
interview panel again attributed Complainant’s low scores to his inability to answer technical
interview questions concerning carpentry. The panel members emphasized that Complainant
scored an average of 12.5 points out of 50 points on the interview, whereas the highest scoring
candidate received an average of 45.25 points and the runner up received an average of 37.5 points.
ROI at 312. Ultimately, the Agency selected the runner up for the position because that candidate
received a positive reference. Id. at 133-134; see also AJ’s Decision at 14.

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency’s stated reasons were merely a
pretext for discrimination. Complainant v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec.
6, 1996). In non-selection cases, Complainant can demonstrate pretext by showing that his
qualifications for the position were plainly superior to those of the selectee. Hung P. v. Dep’t of
                                                  11                                     2019002209

Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120141721 (Dec. 3, 2015). Other indicators of pretext
include discriminatory statements or past personal treatment attributable to those responsible for
the personnel action that led to the filing of the complaint, comparative or statistical data revealing
differences in treatment across various protected-group lines, unequal application of Agency
policy, deviations from standard procedures without explanation or justification, or inadequately
explained inconsistencies in the evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12, 2015).

In arguing pretext, Complainant contends that the Agency “made no argument about the relative
merits other than to argue that the Complainant did not score as well.” He asserts that the “scoring
was done by officials [who were] well aware of [his] prior case and that he was in his current
position as a result.” In this regard, he emphasizes that the “panel for some of the selections
included [the Maintenance Mechanic Supervisor], who was contemporaneously referring to the
Complainant as a ‘raccoon.’” He contends that there “is no articulation as to why the selected are
actually better qualified, just that there were scored higher by the agency officials.” Finally,
Complainant maintains that there are credibility issues with regard to the Agency’s articulated
reasons because the Agency failed to justify how outside employees could “beat out the
Complainant for multiple positions when he [was] working at the next lower level at the Agency
and the Judge does no more than accept a blanket denial.”

Upon review, we find that the AJ’s findings with regard to Complainant’s non-selection claims
are supported by substantial evidence. While we recognize that subjective criteria in the hiring
process may offer a convenient pretext, the record in this case shows that the Agency identified
relevant competencies for the position and asked all candidates the same questions to assess their
ability to perform in each competency. Our review of the interview questions for each of the
vacancy announcement corroborates the AJ’s determination that Complainant did indeed score
significantly lower than the selectees for all of the vacancies at issue. See Pre-Hearing Report,
titled “pp527-593” at 21-67; see also ROI at 235-338, 327-330, and 340. To the extent that
Complainant believes that the AJ erred by only excluding the scores assessed by Maintenance
Mechanic Supervisor without considering the discriminatory influence that he may have had on
the interview panel members, we find such contention to be speculative.

Moreover, we agree with the AJ that Complainant’s resume fails to show that his qualifications
were plainly superior to the selectees. For the Pipefitter position, we note that the selectee worked
as a Pipefitter from June 2008 to June 2013, whereas Complainant was a Laundry Worker from
April 2006 to April 2011 and did not assume the role of Maintenance Worker until July 2011. 6
See Hearing Transcript at 42-44 and 223; see also AJ’s Decision at 12. Given that the selectee had
prior Pipefitter experience, we are unable to conclude that Complainant had plainly superior
qualifications in comparison to the selectee. As for the Maintenance Mechanic positions in claims
4 and 6, we note that the vacancy announcements listed, in part, the following tasks as major duties:


6
  While Complainant indicated in his resume that has worked as a Maintenance Mechanic since
April 2006, he admitted during the hearing that he did not assume that role until his July 2011
settlement. See Hearing Transcript at 42-44.
                                                12                                     2019002209

construction; alteration; and repair and modification of items and structures. ROI at 180-181. Our
review of Complainant’s resume fails to show any relevant experience in construction, alteration,
repair or carpentry. Id. at 164. In comparison, the selectees appear to have extensive experience in
these fields. See Id. at 242, 259, 282, and 292. For these reasons, we find substantial evidence to
support the AJ’s finding of no discrimination with regard to Complainant’s non-selection claims.

We emphasize that a pretext inquiry is not concerned with bad judgment, impeccability, dislike,
or a mistake. Marvin W. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120170438 (Dec. 12,
2018). The question is not whether the Agency made the best, or even a sound, business decision;
it is whether the real reason is discrimination. Mere assertions or conjecture that an agency's
explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief,
however genuine, does not constitute evidence of pretext. The focus of pretext inquiry is whether
an agency's actions were motivated by discriminatory animus. Further, at all times the ultimate
burden of persuasion remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency was motivated by prohibited discrimination. Complainant has failed in
this regard.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record, we MODIFY the Agency’s final order as set forth herein
and REMAND the matter to the Agency for further processing in accordance with the ORDER
below.
                                            ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions:

   1. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      undertake a supplemental investigation concerning Complainant’s entitlement to
      compensatory damages and determine the amount of compensatory damages due
      Complainant in a final decision with appeal rights to the Commission.
      The Agency shall pay this amount to Complainant within thirty (30) calendar days of the
      date of the determination of the amount of compensatory damages. If there is a dispute
      regarding the exact amount of compensatory damages, the Agency shall issue a check to
      Complainant for the undisputed amount. Complainant may petition for enforcement or
      clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be
      filed with the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled
      “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”

   2. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide eight
      hours of in-person or interactive training to Complainant’s former General Foreman. The
      required training shall address the General Foreman’s responsibilities with regard to
      eliminating discrimination in the workplace and his obligation to ensure the confidentiality
      of EEO records.
                                                 13                                      2019002209

   3. To the extent that the General Foreman has not been disciplined for the improper disclosure
      of Complainant’s EEO activity, within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision
      is issued, the Agency shall consider taking disciplinary action against him. The
      Commission does not consider training to be a disciplinary action. The Agency shall report
      its decision to the Commission and specify what, if any, action was taken. If the Agency
      decides not to take disciplinary action, then it shall set forth the reasons for its decision not
      to impose discipline.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation that the corrective action has been implemented.

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at the Richmond VA Medical Center in Richmond, Virginia, copies
of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced,
or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance
Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision,"
within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital
format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g).
                                  ATTORNEY’S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)),
she is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the complaint.
29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The attorney
shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
                                                14                                     2019002209

when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.
                                                  15                                      2019002209

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency to
continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from
the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which the
Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


____________________________               Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 22, 2020
Date
