              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                           Emerson P., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                       Alex M. Azar II,
                                          Secretary,
                           Department of Health and Human Services
                               (Food and Drug Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                    Request No. 2020000849

                                     Appeal No. 0120180491

                              Agency No. HHS-FDACBER-082-16

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120180491 (September 18, 2019).
EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant worked as a Lead Quality Assurance Specialist/Interdisciplinary Scientist at the
Food and Drug Administration in the Quality Assurance Branch, Division of Biological
Standards and Quality Control, Office of Compliance and Biological Quality, Center for
Biologics Evaluation and Research in Silver Spring, Maryland. Complainant’s immediate
supervisor (RMO-1) was the Director of Biological Standards and Quality Control.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020000849

On May 12, 2016, Complainant initiated EEO Counselor contact. On September 1, 2016,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him on the
bases of race (Asian), national origin (Indian), and in reprisal for prior protected activity when:

       1. on July 27, 2016, RMO-1 threatened to take actions to demote him to a lower grade if
          he did not accept his settlement offer;

       2. in May 2016, the Visiting Associate (Witness-2), Complainant’s part-time assistant
          was removed from his division without his knowledge;

       3. on March 28, 2016, Complainant asked RMO-1, “why did he give him a low rating”
          and RMO-1’s response was that he was being punished;

       4. on February 10, 2016, Complainant received a 3.3 score on his Performance
          Management Appraisal Program (PMAP), a score lower than the previous year of 4.0;

       5. on February 1, 2016, Complainant stated that RMO-1 removed his Team Lead title
          and gave him a new job description which was not consistent with his Series 1910,
          Quality Assurance position;

       6. in early 2014, Complainant states that RMO-1 told him to get out of his office or he
          would throw him out;

       7. in May 2014, RMO-1 yelled at Complainant and unfairly blamed him for a
          contractor’s mistake on a federal contract and told Complainant that he did not
          understand him which Complainant tool to mean that he was critical of his Indian
          accent; and

       8. in October 2014, Complainant stated that RMO-1 raised the issue that Complainant’s
          Indian accent was a communication issue.

Complainant requested a final agency decision. In its final decision, the Agency dismissed claim
(1) on the grounds that the incident occurred in the mediation process. The Agency concluded
that claims (3)-(8) were not timely raised with an EEO Counselor but proceeded to analyze the
claims under a hostile work environment analysis.

In our prior decision, we affirmed the Agency’s dismissal of claim (1). The Commission further
found, in the initial decision, that Complainant’s ongoing harassment claim was timely raised.
However, the Commission agreed with the Agency regarding claim (4), that it should only be
considered as background evidence. The Commission found the Agency’s error to be harmless
regarding the procedural dismissal because the Agency did subsequently address the dismissed
claims on the merits in its final decision. Moreover, the initial decision found no discrimination
under a disparate treatment and hostile work environment analysis for the remainder of
Complainant’s complaint.
                                               3                                    2020000849


In his request, Complainant reiterates numerous arguments raised below. In addition,
Complainant requests that specified witnesses be cross-examined before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ).

Upon review of the record, we find that the initial decision properly found no discrimination.
The prior decision contained a detailed analysis in reaching the determination of no
discrimination. While Complainant, in his request reiterates arguments raised below, we remind
complainant that a "request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission."
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive 110 for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (Aug. 5,
2015), Chapter 9.

To the extent that Complainant asserts that specified witnesses should be cross-examined before
an EEOC AJ, the record reflects that Complainant requested a final agency decision via email
dated March 18, 2017. The prior decision properly found that, “Complainant has failed to
establish by a preponderance of the evidence that, more likely than not, the Agency
discriminated against him. At all times, the burden of the persuasion remains with Complainant
to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited
reason. As Complainant chose not to request a hearing, the Commission does not have the
benefit of an [AJ’s] credibility determinations after a hearing.”

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120180491 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
                                                 4                                      2020000849

You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney
directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please
read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 26, 2020
Date
