              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Queen L., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Barbara M. Barrett,
                                          Secretary,
                                  Department of the Air Force,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019004191

                                 Hearing No. 410-2016-00248X

                                  Agency No. 9R1M15075F19

                                           DECISION

Complainant timely filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s April 26, 2019, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the
Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are whether the Agency should be sanctioned for its delay in issuing the final
Agency decision; and whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination based on her protected class and in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Tool Control
Specialist at the Agency’s Robins Air Force Base in Georgia.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                   2                                     2019004191

On June 2, 2015, Complainant initiated EEO Counselor contact. Informal efforts to resolve her
concerns were unsuccessful.

On August 4, 2015, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the bases of age (51) and reprisal for protected EEO activity (prior activity and
initiating instant complaint) when:

          1.     on January 31, 2014, Complainant alleged discrimination regarding management’s
                 training policy for career broadening when she was continuously denied training
                 opportunities as related to her Career Training Plan 2; and,

          2.     on May 29, 2015, Complainant was issued her 2014-2015 Performance Appraisal,
                 with an award justification in Part C of the AF Form 860A but was later re-issued
                 the same appraisal on June 4, 2015; this time the written award justification in Part
                 C of the AF Form 860A was deleted.

The Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. The investigative record reflects the
following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

Claim 1

From January 2013 until March 2014, the Deputy Chief was Complainant's first-line supervisor
(over 40, no details on EEO activity) (RMO 31). In March 2014, another employee was appointed
to the Deputy Chief position and became Complainant's first-line supervisor (over 40, no details
on EEO activity) (RMO2). From January 2013 until February 2014, the Flight Chief was
Complainant's second-line supervisor (over 40, no details on EEO activity) (RMO3). In February
2014, RMO3 became Deputy Director, 559th Aircraft Maintenance and subsequently became
Complainant's third line supervisor.

Complainant asserted that since January 31, 2014, she has been denied training opportunities as
notated in her Civilian Training Plan (CTP), and that these denials have had a negative impact on
her career advancement and promotional potential. Complainant asserted that she made multiple
training requests with no success. Complainant also asserted that RMO3 had previously suggested
that Complainant go back to school to advance her career, but then later said that, due to her age,
additional schooling would probably not benefit her. Additionally, Complainant asserted that,
when questioned as to why she was not receiving any training, RMO3 responded that the Agency
was only hiring and promoting younger employees, rather than training older employees.




2
    This is referred to subsequently as the Civilian Training Plan.
3
    Responsible Management Official (RMO).
                                                3                                    2019004191

RMO1 stated that he never denied Complainant training due to her age, and that he has never heard
or witnessed anything to indicate that Complainant’s age would be a factor in any employment
decision. RMO1 stated that the Agency provided training to enable employees to perform their
assigned duties but not to give them career-broadening experience to qualify for promotions. He
stressed that if employees wanted career advancement, they had to seek further education on their
own time.

RMO2 denied ever making age-based statements or denying Complainant training due to her age.
RMO2 stated that during the informal processing of this complaint, he realized that Complainant’s
training was not as up to date as it should have been, and he assigned Complainant with a training
course. He stated that, as of December 2015, Complainant's training records indicated that she
had received several classes and her trainings were up to date. He noted that in the past,
Complainant had requested one contracting class that was not approved for her position and it was
therefore denied. He noted that the class was not pertinent to her job.

RMO3 asserted that Complainant's age and prior EEO activity were not factors in any of his
decisions, nor did he observe others make decisions based on Complainant’s age or prior EEO
activity. RMO3 recalled that he became involved with Complainant's assigned duties in January
or February 2014, while assisting with the business aspects of the Deputy Director position. RMO3
noted that in one January 31, 2014 request, Complainant was denied because the course was
unavailable. However, her request was recorded. He noted that if enough employees requested the
same training, the Agency could bring an instructor for a class training. RMO3 denied ever making
age-based statements or denying Complainant training due to her age.

The Human Resources (HR) Chief (over 40, no prior EEO activity) stated that as a result of
Complainant’s complaint, the HR department learned that her CTP and her Production Acceptance
Certification Standards (PACS) folders were not aligned. The HR Chief discovered that
Complainant’s PACS folder did not indicate all the trainings she was entitled to based on her CTP.
The HR Chief noted that as a result of the misalignment, if Complainant had requested any training
in her CTP, it would have been denied as it was not in her PACS folder. The HR Chief stated that
the misalignment appeared to be about a year out of date, and that once he realigned the folders,
eight to ten trainings were opened to Complainant.

Claim 2

Complainant asserted that due to the instant complaint, management eliminated her eligibility for
a performance award for 2014-2015. Complainant noted that there was an award justification in
Part C of the AF Form 860A, but it was later re-issued with the award justification deleted.
Complainant noted that the re-issued document came two days after she had initiated EEO
Counselor contact in the instant matter.

RMO2 stated that he completed Complainant’s appraisal using RMO1’s input, who had been
Complainant’s supervisor for a portion of the rating year. He noted that the award justification
(Part C) had two statements included by Complainant.
                                                4                                    2019004191

RMO3 reviewed the appraisal and noted that one of the statements did not indicate an
accomplishment above and beyond what Complainant was expected to accomplish. As a result,
RMO2 removed the statement. RMO2 also noted that while the other statement was reasonable,
Complainant’s performance had not exceeded expectations on at least three elements, and
therefore, she would not have been eligible for an award anyway. The HR Chief later contacted
RMO2 and stated that because Complainant was not receiving an award, the award justification
had to be blank. Thereafter, RMO2 issued a new appraisal on June 4, 2015. RMO2 and RMO3
denied factoring Complainant’s age or her EEO activity when her appraisal was issued.

The HR Chief stated that, in prior years award justification, comments were left even if an award
was not provided. The HR Chief stated that he had informed management that if no award was
given, then Part C had to remain blank.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but
subsequently withdrew her request by letter dated and postmarked on May 31, 2016. Thereafter,
by order dated June 21, 2016, and mailed out July 12, 2016, the AJ dismissed the hearing request
and remanded the matter to the Agency for the issuance of a Final Agency Decision (FAD) within
60 days pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

On or about October 18, 2018, having not received a copy of the FAD, Complainant, through
counsel, inquired about the status of the complaint. On November 19, 2018, the Agency responded
that due to an administrative error, the Agency had never received the AJ’s June 21, 2016 Order.
The Agency noted that it would expedite the matter and issue the FAD as soon as possible. On
April 26, 2019, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant, through counsel, argued that the Commission should sanction the Agency
for its delay in issuing the FAD. Complainant argued that while a FAD should be issued within 60
days, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency’s April 26, 2019 FAD was severely
delayed. Complainant argued that the Agency’s reasons for noncompliance failed to show good
cause and therefore the Agency should be sanctioned. Regarding the merits of the complaint,
Complainant asserted that she had clearly established a prima facie case of discrimination and
retaliation, and that any provided reasons by the Agency were mere pretext for discrimination. For
example, Complainant noted the negative comments made in relation to her age and her desire to
obtain additional training. Moreover, she noted that positive remarks on her evaluation forms were
removed only after management learned of her EEO activity.
                                                5                                     2019004191

The Agency argued that sanctions would not be appropriate as the nature of the noncompliance
was an administrative error regarding the processing of the AJ’s Order of Dismissal and the
Agency took immediate action to remedy the error. Moreover, the Agency argued that
Complainant failed to demonstrate that she was prejudiced by the Agency’s delay. Furthermore,
regarding the merits of the complaint, the Agency asserted that Complainant failed to establish a
prima facie face of discrimination or retaliation. Even if she had, the Agency argued that it had
provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, to which Complainant failed to
demonstrate was pretext for discrimination.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Delay in Issuance of Final Agency Decision (FAD)

On appeal, Complainant requests that the Commission sanction the Agency for its failure to timely
issue a final agency decision within the prescribed 60 days pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
EEOC regulations provide that an agency shall issue the final decision within 60 days of receiving
notification that a complainant has requested an immediate decision.

We note that our regulations require agency action in a timely manner at many points in the EEO
process. Tammy S. v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 0120084008 (June 6, 2014). Compliance
with these timeframes is not optional; as the Commission stated in Royal v. Dep’t of Veterans
Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009), “the Commission has the inherent
power to protect its administrative process from abuse by either party and must insure that
agencies, as well as complainants, abide by its regulations.” Because of the length of time it can
take to process a federal sector EEO complaint, any delays in complying with the time frames in
the regulations can impact the outcome of the complainant's claims. Id.

If we consider the October 21, 2018 date as the date that the Agency became aware of its
responsibility to issue the FAD, then its April 26, 2019 FAD was issued approximately six months
after that date. If we consider the AJ’s initial June 21, 2016 Order, which was mailed on July 12,
2016, then the Agency’s April 26, 2019 FAD was issued approximately two years and nine months
after the AJ’s order.
                                                 6                                      2019004191

Here the Agency argued on appeal that, due to an administrative error, it did not realize it had the
responsibility of issuing Complainant a FAD. The Agency noted that as soon as it was put on
notice, it expedited the matter and issued the FAD. The Agency moreover argued that while the
FAD was issued several months after Complainant’s October 21, 2018 email, sanctions were not
warranted as Complainant had not made a showing that she was prejudiced by any Agency delay.

Given the specifics of this case, we find that the Agency did not act in a manner to warrant a a
sanction. Even if we were to consider the April 26, 2019 FAD as being delayed approximately two
years and nine months, Complainant has not demonstrated that she was prejudiced by the delay.
See e.g., Josefina L. v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0120142023 (July 19, 2016), req. for
recon. den'd, EEOC Request No. 0520170108 (Feb. 9, 2017) (finding that the Agency's 571-day
delay in issuing a final decision did not warrant sanctions, as complainant did not show she was
prejudiced by the delay); Jocelyn R. v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 0120152852 (Mar. 11,
2016) (citing Vunder v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A55147 (May 12, 2006), declining
to sanction an agency that issued a final decision after approximately 371 days).

While we will not impose a sanction in the present case because the delay in issuance of the FAD
did not prejudice the Complainant or result in an unconscionable delay in justice, we do find the
Agency’s failure to abide by the regulations reflects negatively on the Agency’s support for the
integrity of the EEO process. As a result, we will notify Federal Sector Programs (FSP) which
monitors the federal agencies’ EEO programs of the Agency’s failure to comply with the
regulations regarding the timely issuance of its final agency decision.

Disparate Treatment

Complainant alleges that she was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, she must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978).
The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has
met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's
Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the factual inquiry
can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of
whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s actions were
motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714
(1983).
                                                7                                     2019004191

With respect to Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, assuming without so finding that
Complainant established a prima facie case of age discrimination and reprisal, the Agency has
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. As to claim 1, Complainant
asserted that since January 31, 2014, she was continuously denied training opportunities as related
to her CTP. The record demonstrated that while there was a discrepancy in her file folder that
could have resulted in denial of certain training requests, there is no indication that any of the
responsible management officials were aware of this error until the HR department reviewed
Complainant’s CTP. Additionally, management officials noted that once they were made aware
of the error, efforts were made to have Complainant complete associated trainings.

In this matter, we note that the action of approving and denying training requests is a routine
managerial action, which, absent discriminatory animus, will not be second-guessed by the
Commission. We note that agencies generally have broad discretion to carry out personnel
decisions and exercise business judgment. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No.
05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996). Complainant argued that the reasons provided were pretextual and that
management had made specific age-related comments regarding her desire to further her career.

We note that pretext inquiry is not concerned with bad judgment, impeccability, dislike, or a
mistake. Marvin W. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120170438 (Dec. 12, 2018).
The question is not whether the Agency made the best, or even a sound, business decision; it is
whether the real reason is discrimination. Mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s
explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief,
however genuine, does not constitute evidence of pretext. The focus of pretext inquiry is whether
an agency’s actions were motivated by discriminatory animus. Further, at all times the ultimate
burden of persuasion remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency was motivated by prohibited discrimination. Complainant has failed in
this regard.

The record presented conflicting statements regarding management’s alleged age-based
comments. However, Complainant withdrew her hearing request, and as such we do not have the
benefit of an AJ's credibility determinations of these conflicting witnesses. Complainant had to
prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged discriminatory act occurred. Here, the
evidence is, at best, in equipoise. Accordingly, Complainant has failed to meet her burden of
persuasion. Complainant v. Dep't of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120122134
(Sept. 24, 2014) citing Lore v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113283 (Sept. 13,
2013) and Brand v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120102187 (Aug. 23, 2012).

As to claim 2, again assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination and retaliation, the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons
for its action when the award justification for 2014-2015 was removed and the Agency did not
award Complainant a performance award. Specifically, the record demonstrated that Complainant
did not exceed expectations to warrant a performance award. Additionally, HR had requested that
management remove any award justification statements if an employee was not actually receiving
an award.
                                                 8                                     2019004191

Complainant argued that the Agency’s statements were clearly pretextual as the award justification
was suspiciously removed after her initial EEO Counselor contact. However, based on the record,
we find that Complainant has failed to demonstrate that the responsible Agency officials were in
any way motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus when the award justification was
removed with guidance from HR.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding that it did not
discriminate or retaliate against Complainant as alleged.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other
party. Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   9                                      2019004191

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 21, 2020
Date
