              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Otis H.,1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Dr. Mark T. Esper,
                                          Secretary,
                                    Department of Defense
                            (Defense Information Systems Agency),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019001146

                                Agency No. DOD-DISA-18-002

                                           DECISION

On December 3, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 14, 2018, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are whether the preponderance of the evidence in the record establishes that
Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment and discrimination based on his
protected classes.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Network
Administrator at the Agency’s Business Division in Procurement Logistics (PL) at Scott Air Force
Base in Illinois.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019001146

On November 27, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
him to a hostile work environment and discriminated against him on the bases of race (African-
American), sex2 (male), and color3 (Black) when:

       1.      from August 29, 2017 to April 1, 2018, Complainant’s first line supervisor, the
               Chief Enterprise Services (S1) (Caucasian male), allowed Global Service Desk
               employees, CW1 and CW2, to direct networking courses of action on the
               Information Technology System Management ticketing system;

       2.      from August 29, 2017 to April 1, 2018, S1 segregated Complainant from PL13
               team members and restricted the assistance rendered to Complainant by PL13 team
               members;

       3.      on October 18, 2017, S1 harassed and bullied Complainant into letting Lifecycle
               Replacement team member, CW3, to continue to cut users from the switch after
               Complainant instructed CW3 not to do so; and,

       4.      From October 2017 to April 1, 2018, S1 has been more responsible to feedback
               provided by Caucasian PL13 team members, and less likely to report network
               outages precipitated by Caucasian PL13 team members in comparison to
               Complainant.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

CW1 and CW2 (both Caucasian females) worked in the helpdesk ticketing system. When a system
goes down, CW1 and CW2 assign the ticket to an administrator, such as Complainant.
Complainant then investigates why the incident occurred. Complainant asserted that for at least
six months, CW1 and CW2, directed him on how to do his job. Complainant asserted that he
complained of this, and his second line supervisor, the Chief Business Operations Division (S2)
(Caucasian male) allegedly directed them to stop. However, Complainant asserted that S1 allowed
them to start directing his work again in August 2017. Complainant found this frustrating as CW1
and CW2 were customer support personnel, did not have the technical expertise to direct his work.

S1 stated that he did not supervise CW1 and CW2. S1 noted that in June 2017, CW1 and CW2
were moved to a different building after both individuals alleged that Complainant was harassing
them.



2
 During the investigation, Complainant informed the EEO Investigator that he did not believe that
his sex was a factor regarding his allegations.
3
 During the investigation, Complainant withdrew the basis of color from his complaint.
Complainant testified that he considered race and color to be synonymous.
                                                3                                     2019001146

S1 denied ever directing CW1 or CW2 to instruct Complainant how to do his job, or that
Complainant should follow either CW1 or CW2’s advice. S2 stated that he was aware of the
accusation but that when he looked into the matter, he could not find evidence to substantiate
Complainant’s allegations.

Regarding Claim 2, Complainant asserted that the incident occurred in October 2017. Complainant
stated that he was working on a Lifecycle Replacement project. He stated that there was cabling
that had to be done prior to the headquarters (HQ) team arriving. Prior to the HQ team’s arrival,
S1 allegedly informed Complainant that he would have to do the cabling alone. When he asked
why he had to do the cabling alone, S1 purportedly told him that he had no other networking people
to assist him.

S1 denied segregating Complainant, forcing him to work alone, or barring those team members
from assisting him. S1 stated that prior to becoming Complainant’s supervisor, Complainant had
signed a “Pre-cutover site requirements” document dated May 10, 2017. The requirements were
set to be completed prior to the HQ team arriving. However, Complainant had to take emergency
leave from October 19 to 23, 2017, prior to finishing the project. S1 and S2 noted that while not
in their responsibilities, the HQ team completed the cabling cleanup with assistance from the
Telecom team. As for not having enough assistance, S1 sent Complainant numerous emails seeing
if he needed assistance as the project was supposed to be completed in August 2017 but was pushed
back to October 2017. S2 corroborated the statement and noted that he was copied on those emails.

Part of Complainant’s job is to ensure the network runs smoothly. On October 18, 2017,
Complainant was organizing cables in the communications closet that bad become badly
entangled. Complainant asserted that he informed S1 that if the cables were cut, users would lose
connectivity. However, some cables were so badly entangled, that reorganizing without cutting
some was impossible. At some point, S1, Complainant, and CW3 (Caucasian female) were
together organizing the closet. CW3 cut some cables as part of the cleanup. S1 initially believed
that there were no users on the cables being cut. However, S1 later determined that those who were
teleworking were inadvertently impacted. S1 informed upper management that about fifty users
were impacted. Complainant asserted he was required to fix the connections without assistance.
S1 denied this and stated that he and another employee assisted in reconnecting the impacted users.

Regarding the fourth claim, Complainant noted that outages caused by Caucasian employees were
less likely, if ever, to be reported to upper management, especially when compared to networks he
worked on. For example, on October 25, 2017, Complainant asserted that S1 brought down a
network, but that it was not reported to upper management. In contrast, when Complainant worked
on the wireless local area network (LAN) infrastructure, and it temporarily went offline, it was
immediately reported. Complainant asserted that the two incidents demonstrated how management
was less likely to report network outages caused by Caucasian employees compared to him.

S1 asserted that the October 25, 2017 incident was the result of a firewall being down. It was a
simple matter of a cable being mistakenly re-plugged into an incorrect port. S1 stated that it was
easily and readily resolved.
                                                 4                                      2019001146

The wireless system, on the other hand, directly impacted users as the system was down for an
extended period. The wireless network was reported by users, and not by S1 or S2. S1 and S2
noted that no discipline was issued in either incident.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge
(AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant requested that the Commission reverse the Agency’s finding of no discrimination.
Complainant asserted that while he provided documentation substantiating his claims, it appeared
as if the Agency did not review it as it was not discussed in the final Agency decision.

The Agency did not provide an appellate brief in opposition to Complainant’s appeal.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-
110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of
the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony
of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

Complainant alleges that he was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corporation v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie
case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference
of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438
U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253
(1981).
                                                   5                                       2019001146

Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade
the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited
reason. St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the factual inquiry
can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of
whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s actions were
motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Service Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711,
713-714 (1983).

Unlawful Harassment

Complainant also alleged that he was subjected to unlawful harassment. A harassment claim is
examined under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).
See also Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems. Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002
(Mar. 8, 1994). To establish this claim, a complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a
statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability.

The Supreme Court in Harris explained that an “objectively hostile or abusive work environment
[is created when] a reasonable person would find [it] hostile or abusive” and the complainant
subjectively perceives it as such. Harris, 510 U.S. at 21-22. Whether the harassment is sufficiently
severe to trigger a violation must be determined by looking at all the circumstances, including “the
frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or
humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an
employee's work performance.” Id. at 23.

A hostile work environment exists when the workplace is permeated with discriminatory
intimidation, ridicule, and insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the condition of the
complainant's employment. See Harris, supra; see also Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Svcs., Inc.,
523 U.S. 75, 78 (1998).

With respect to element (5) of a harassment claim, an agency is subject to vicarious liability for
harassment when it is created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority
over the employee. See Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998); Faragher v.
City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998); Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful
Harassment by Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999).
                                                6                                     2019001146

Analysis

Regarding Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, if we assume, arguendo, that Complainant
established a prima facie case of discrimination based on his protected classes, the Agency has
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. For example, Complainant
asserted that he was treated differently compared to Caucasian employees when it came to network
outages. Complainant asserted that the disparate treatment singled him out and made him appear
to be a poor performing employee. Complainant noted, for example, an October 25, 2017 incident
when S1 allowed a network to temporarily come down but was not widely reported for causing
the issue. In comparison, when he worked on a wireless network issue, he was immediately
reported to upper management when the network came down. Complainant believed it was part of
a pattern of Caucasian employees being treated preferentially. Here, the record demonstrated that
the two incidents were substantially different from one another. S1’s firewall incident was a quick
resolve that did not negatively impact employees’ productions. In contrast, when the wireless
network came down, users themselves widely reported the incident. The record indicated that
neither S1 or Complainant was disciplined for either issue, and it appeared that both were examples
of common workplace events.

Regarding Complainant’s claim of hostile work environment, we find that the examples provided
do not demonstrate evidence of a pervasively hostile work environment. For example,
Complainant asserted that S1 had directed and/or allowed CW1 and CW2 to direct Complainant
on how to do the technical component of his position. Complainant found this to be harassing as
neither were technically trained individuals, and yet were instructing him on how to do his job.
However, despite Complainant’s assertions, there is no evidence in the record that demonstrated
that management had instructed CW1 or CW2 to direct Complainant on how to do the technical
components of his job. CW1 and CW2 both worked in the ticketing helpdesk and were responsible
for assigning tickets when claims occurred. There is no indication that outside of assigning
Complainant tickets for work, that either directed Complainant on how to do his job. Moreover,
after submitting a complaint to S2, S2 investigated the matter, but did not find any evidence to
substantiate Complainant’s complaint. Complainant also noted that he was frequently required to
work alone and denied assistance when asked.

Based on the record, we find no evidence that these incidents would demonstrate an objectively
hostile environment. We note that the discrimination statutes are not a civility code. What is
prohibited is “behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim’s
employment.” Oncale, 523 U.S. at 81. In sum, the evidence does not support a finding of
discrimination on any basis, the presence of discriminatory animus, or the existence of a hostile
work environment.
                                                  7                                     2019001146

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding that it did not
discriminate against Complainant as alleged.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title.
                                                   8                                      2019001146

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means
the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 25, 2020
Date
