              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                          Douglas F.,1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Kathy Kraninger,
                                           Director,
                            Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection,
                                           Agency.

                                    Request No. 2019005467

                                    Appeal No. 0120170529

                                  Agency No. CFPB20150018

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120170529 (March 5, 2019). EEOC
regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to reconsider any
previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting
party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant worked as a Supervisory Examiner/Field Manager in the Agency’s Southeast
Region, Office of Supervision, Fair Lending and Enforcement. Complainant filed an EEO
complaint, which he amended, alleging that the Agency harassed and discriminated against him
on the bases of race (Nigerian-American/Black), national origin (Nigerian/Ibo), age, and reprisal.
Complainant raised 19 claims that included, but were not limited to, allegations of
unprofessional conduct, being subjected to scrutiny, evaluations, promotion, leave matters,
failure to approve travel authorization and vouchers and stipends, and being given a reprimand.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2019005467

Complainant requested a decision by the Agency. Our prior appellate decision affirmed the
Agency’s final decision that concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The decision, which addressed each claim, found
that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, and
Complainant did not prove he was subjected to unlawful harassment or discrimination.

In his request for reconsideration, Complainant expresses his disagreement with the previous
decision and states he does not feel the decision was based on an impartial record. We note that
Complainant did not request a hearing, and thus there was no additional discovery and credibility
findings that such would offer. We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second
appeal to the Commission. See EEO MD-110, Ch. 9, § VII.A. Rather, a reconsideration request
is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices,
or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120170529 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.


                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  3                                      2019005467

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 10, 2019
Date
