             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Cecille W., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Megan J. Brennan,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                        (Eastern Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019000618

                                 Agency No. 4C-400-0006-18

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 17, 2018 final
decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint claiming employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a Postal Support Employee (PSE) Mail
Processing Clerk at the Agency’s Hikes Point Station in Louisville, Kentucky.

On December 13, 2017, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint. Complainant claimed that
the Agency discriminated against her based on race (African-American), sex (female), and in
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity.

The Agency accepted the formal complaint for investigation and determined that it was
comprised of the following claim: On November 7, 2017, [Complainant was] issued a Notice of
Removal.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2019000618

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The Agency found no discrimination. Specifically, the Agency found that Complainant did not
establish a prima face case of retaliation because the alleged responsible management officials
were not aware of her prior protected activity. The Agency also found in its final decision that
Complainant did not establish a prima face case of race and/or sex discrimination. The Agency
further found that even assuming arguendo that Complainant did establish a prima facie case of
discrimination and/or retaliation, it articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
Complainant’s removal. Specifically, the Agency found that the Notice of Removal set forth that
Complainant was removed because she had been absent since August 1, 2017 and continuing.
The Agency found that Complainant failed to establish that the Agency’s articulated reason was
pretext for discrimination and/or retaliation.

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant asserts that she was reinstated through the
grievance process. She states that she is still seeking lost wages for the time she was not
provided with work.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

We find that Complainant in her pre-complaint documentation, formal complaint and EEO
investigative affidavit raised a denial of a reasonable accommodation claim based on disability
(migraines) which was not addressed by the Agency in its final decision. The record contains a
copy of the EEO Counselor’s Report. Therein, Complainant asserts that she had migraines and
that a named manager would not accept her medical documentation and that management would
not provide her with a reduced schedule. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 17. According to the
EEO Counselor’s Report, one manager asserted that Complainant submitted medical
documentation that was not sufficient and that Complainant was charged with Absence without
Leave. ROI at 18.
                                                  3                                     2019000618

In addition, another manager, according to the EEO Counselor’s Report stated that Complainant
provided medical documentation for her restrictions which included working approximately 30
hours per week between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. Id. The manager stated that Complainant was not
needed during these hours. Id.

Complainant also raised the denial of a reasonable accommodation claim in an attachment to her
formal complaint. ROI at 9. Specifically, Complainant asserted that she had migraine headaches
and that she submitted medical documentation which was not accepted by management. Id.
Complainant states that she submitted two return to work statements but she has not been placed
back on the schedule and that her restrictions were within the range of what she was previously
working. Id.

Moreover, Complainant raised a denial of a reasonable accommodation claim in her EEO
Investigative affidavit. Complainant asserted that she had migraines and that her restrictions
limited her to no more than 30 hours per week between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. ROI at 76, 81.
Complainant asserts that the position she was offered was outside of her restrictions. ROI at 81.

While we acknowledge Complainant did not check the basis of disability in her formal
complaint, Complainant, as set forth above, has consistently raised throughout the EEO process
a denial of reasonable accommodation claim which she alleges subsequently resulted in her
removal. 2 Thus, we find that the Agency should have addressed this matter in its final decision.
See Jackson v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05930176 (Aug. 26, 1993) (remanding
reprisal claim to agency for supplemental investigation when Complainant raised this matter
during EEO Counseling and in her EEO affidavit but did not specifically check off the “reprisal”
box on her formal complaint form).

Under the Commission’s regulations, an Agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
of the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2 “The
term ‘qualified,’ with respect to an individual with a disability, means that the individual satisfies
the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment
position such individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can
perform the essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).

The record is not sufficiently developed regarding Complainant’s reasonable accommodation
claim. The requirement that an agency investigate complaints of discrimination is codified at 29
C.F.R. § 1614.108. The Agency has a duty to develop an impartial and appropriate factual
record upon which to make findings on the claims raised by the written complaint. An
appropriate factual record is one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw conclusions as to
whether discrimination occurred. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b).




2
    The record reflects that Complainant did not have a representative throughout the EEO process.
                                                4                                     2019000618

Assuming without finding, that Complainant is a qualified individual with a disability, we are
unable to ascertain based on the record before us what steps, if any, the Agency took to
accommodate Complainant’s restrictions. The record contains a copy of a letter dated September
13, 2017, from an Advanced Practice Registered Nurse (APRN) stating that Complainant was
able to return work and “[t]o better keep her migraines/headaches under control it is best that she
only work regular routine daytime hours.” ROI at 165. The record also contains a letter from
APRN dated September 25, 2017, stating that Complainant is able to return to work. ROI at 166.
The letter further stated “[i]n order to help keep headaches under better control, it is
recommended that patient works no more than 30 [hours] per week between the hours of 8-
5pm.” Id. As set forth above, we are unable to ascertain based on the record, what steps the
Agency took to accommodate Complainant; thus, we remand this matter for a supplemental
investigation.

Finally, a review of the record reflects Complainant is alleging that the denial of her reasonable
accommodation (the Agency not providing her work within her restrictions) led to her removal.
Therefore, we decline to address her removal herein in order to avoid the fragmentation of her
claims.

We VACATE the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination, and we REMAND this
matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation in accordance with the ORDER below.

                                             ORDER

Within ninety (90) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall complete
a supplemental investigation on Complainant’s denial of a reasonable accommodation claim,
which shall include the following:

       1.    The EEO Investigator shall fully investigate Complainant’s denial of a reasonable
            accommodation claim, including any possible contention by the Agency that
            providing a reasonable accommodation would impose an undue hardship. The
            Agency shall ensure that the Investigator obtains all pertinent evidence needed to
            address Complainant’s reasonable accommodation claim including, but not limited to,
            sworn affidavits from Complainant and from responsible management officials and
            other documentary evidence regarding how management responded to Complainant’s
            requests for accommodation (work within her restrictions). Documentary evidence
            should include any requests by Complainant for an accommodation and any job offers
            by management to accommodate Complainant, including possible efforts by the
            Agency to provide Complainant with a reassignment within her restrictions.

       2. Complainant shall have the opportunity to provide a rebuttal affidavit.

       3. Once the supplemental investigation is completed, the Agency shall issue a new final
          decision, with appeal rights to the Commission’s Office of Federal Operations,
                                                5                                     2019000618

           addressing Complainant’s denial of a reasonable accommodation claim and her
           removal.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) . This report must include a copy of the
supplemental investigation and new final agency decision.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                                 6                                     2019000618

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                 RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact
               or law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of
Federal Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for
reconsideration in which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405;
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Complainant’s request may be submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail
within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The
agency’s request must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration
as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title.
                                                7                                    2019000618

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 28, 2020
Date
