              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                          Melanie F., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Megan J. Brennan,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                        (Western Area),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019001627

                                  Agency No. 4E-640-0008-18

                                           DECISION

On August 10, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
July 31, 2018 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Letter Carrier at
the Agency’s Post Office in Webb City, Missouri.

On January 22, 2018 (and subsequently amended), Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
that the Agency discriminated against her and subjected her to a hostile work environment on the
bases of sex (female) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO when:

       1.      On numerous occasions, including October 23 and 27, 2017, Complainant’s
               supervisor denied Complainant’s full requests for auxiliary assistance, mandated



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2019001627

               Complainant to work overtime, and wrote Complainant up for being one click over
               her end tour;

       2.      On October 11 and 16, 2017, management denied Complainant’s requests to take
               annual leave in November;

       3.      On January 2, 2018, Complainant’s supervisor demanded medical documentation
               for her scheduled sick leave;

       4.      On January 29 and 30, 2018, Complainant’s supervisor stared at her with her arms
               crossed and raised her voice at Complainant and told the entire office they could
               not talk just because she saw Complainant speaking to another carrier; and

       5.      On January 26, 2018, and possibly other dates, Complainant was forced to work
               her Scheduled Day Off (SDO).

Complainant based her allegations on her belief that her managers favored male co-workers
because they do not file union grievances or EEO complaints. More specifically, regarding Claim
(1), Complainant alleged that she requested an hour and 10 minutes of auxiliary help on October
27, 2017. However, her supervisor (S1) approved only 45 minutes. Complainant contended that
S1’s actions violated the collective bargaining agreement. In addition, Complainant repeatedly
pointed to money she has been paid as the result of prior EEO and union grievance settlements as
evidence of the intent of S1 and management to retaliate against her and subject her to a hostile
work environment. Complainant also identified herself as a Union Steward and claimed that
management’s actions toward her was no coincidence given her position. Complainant argued
that the Agency discriminated against a fellow female coworker, who was the alternate Union
Steward. Moreover, Complainant claimed that S1 mandated her to work overtime even though
there were available carriers who were junior to her.

S1 averred that she approved Complainant’s requests for auxiliary help on 12 separate occasions.
S1 affirmed that on October 23, 2017, she granted 45 minutes of assistance to Complainant when
she requested 70 minutes because the volume of mail did not justify 70 minutes of assistance. S1
noted that at the time, she was not aware that she could not disapprove assistance when the
workload did not show it. S1 denied that Complainant was mandated to work overtime on October
27, 2017. Further, S1 denied that Complainant was written up for being one click over time; rather,
she was nine clicks over time. The Postmaster affirmed that management did not write up its
employees for having one click of overtime.

In Claim (2), Complainant specified that on October 6, 2017, she requested leave for November
9, 2017. On October 11, 2017, S1 denied Complainant’s request because another carrier already
had leave the entire week. Complainant argued that week as an open week of “Choice Prime Time
Vacation” and no other carrier had requested leave that week. In an attempt to compare herself to
male coworkers, Complainant referred to a different week – that of September 21, 2017 – in which
two male coworkers were allowed to take leave at the same time.
                                                 3                                     2019001627


Complainant contended that management has turned the other carriers in the office against her by
telling them that Complainant was out to get them. The Postmaster affirmed that the carriers in
her office said they were unhappy with Complainant as the Union Steward and unhappy “about
the way she files grievances on any and everything possible.”

S1 averred, with confirmation from the Postmaster, that she denied Complainant’s request for
leave due to the needs of the service. According to S1, one carrier was on a “hold down” and one
was on a furlough. Further, it was a holiday week. S1 also told Complainant that she would reach
out for help. After S1 found help for that day, Complainant insisted on taking leave the entire
week and that she wanted all or nothing. Complainant then wrote her name on the “Prime Time
Vacation” list which, according to S1, was already closed and posted.

As to Claim (3), Complainant contended that S1 immediately demanded medical documentation
when Complainant requested sick leave for a medical appointment. Complainant objected to S1
that documentation was not required for a medical appointment, and after Complainant asked S1
to make her request in writing, S1 approved Complainant’s request for sick leave. Complainant
argued that S1 did not require male carriers to provide medical documentation in support of a
request for sick leave for a doctor’s appointment.

S1 denied that she asked for medical documentation, but the Postmaster recalled that S1 told her
that she requested documentation because Complainant made her request on a Saturday for the
following Monday, making it difficult to plan ahead for coverage. However, the Postmaster
approved the request after Complainant explained that she had been trying to secure an
appointment with that medical provider for a while, and an opening came up.

Regarding Claim (4), Complainant claimed that on January 28, 2017, S1 was glaring at her, and
that the next day, she had her arms crossed and was again glaring at her. S1 alleged that a female
carrier asked her why S1 was glaring at them and Complainant told her to ignore it, and that S1
was just trying to intimidate them. Complainant declared that when she spoke to the female carrier
again, S1 approached the case and yelled that there would be no more talking. The carrier told S1
that there were others talking and S1 then told the entire office to be quiet, that they had lots of
work to get done, that there were people walking around and not working, and that there would be
no more talking at all. Complainant argued that S1 did not act similarly toward male coworkers.

S1 denied that she raised her voice, but agreed that she asked Complainant and her coworkers to
stop talking after witnessing them leaving their cases multiple times to converse. S1 added that
she was watching Complainant because she witnessed Complainant multiple times performing
time wasting practices, and failing to follow her instructions.

As to Claim (5), Complainant contended that management continued to violate the collective
bargaining agreement by mandating her to work on her SDO. Complainant noted that January 26,
2018, three male coworkers clocked out before she did, and one was permitted to take annual leave.
One of the male coworkers (CW1) had Mondays as one of his SDOs.
                                                 4                                      2019001627

Complainant claimed that Mondays were the heaviest day of the week, and yet, CW1 has never
been mandated to work on Mondays.

S1 and the Postmaster explained that the Agency approved mandating a carrier on a SDO that day
because one carrier was on maternity leave and another carrier was on a hold down covering
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) sick leave. Further, Complainant had the lowest seniority of
the non-scheduled employees for that day. Therefore, Complainant was mandated to carry the
route. The male coworkers all carried their routes and clocked out when they were done. By
comparison, Complainant’s shift was all overtime pay. S1 also explained that Saturdays, one of
Complainant’s SDOs, was the only day that had two non-scheduled employees, compared to the
rest of the week. Therefore, when one scheduled employee called out of work, it severely affected
the unit.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge
(AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In the decision, the Agency concluded that management provided legitimate, non-discriminatory
reasons for its actions. In addition to the reasons described above, the Agency noted that
management provided documentation showing that male coworkers, along with Complainant,
were documented as having incurred unauthorized overtime, and an instance in which a male
coworker did not receive auxiliary assistance as requested. The Agency further concluded that the
alleged incidents were insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a hostile work environment.
As a result, the Agency found that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a
hostile work environment as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant argues that she did, indeed, request a hearing. Complainant contends
that the Postmaster and S1 lied in their affidavits and suggests they should be charged with perjury.
Complainant reiterates the same arguments as set forth in her affidavit. Complainant argues that
the record evidence clearly shows that management treated her differently than her co-workers.
Accordingly, Complainant requests that the Commission reverse the final decision.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
                                                 5                                      2019001627

record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

We note that although Complainant argues she requested a hearing, Complainant submitted no
documentation or evidence, beyond her bare assertion, in support of her claim. Therefore, we find
that the Agency properly issued a final decision.

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, Complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary
scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792
(1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he was
subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference
of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima
facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 804 n.14. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's
explanation is pretextual. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 120 S. Ct.
2097 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action at issue, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
Agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens,
460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Dep't. of Transp., EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June
28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep't of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8,
1990); Washington v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

In this matter, the Agency has explained each of its actions. Regarding Claim (1), S1 explained
that she approved Complainant’s requests for auxiliary assistance. As to the specific request for
an hour and 10 minutes, S1 disagreed that the workload justified that much time but approved 45
minutes. S1 also denied writing Complainant or anyone else up for having one click of overtime,
but said that Complainant had nine clicks of overtime. S1 noted that Complainant was not written
up; rather, her unauthorized overtime was documented on 1017-B form as was the process for all
employees. Additionally, S1 and the Postmaster denied that Complainant was mandated overtime
on the date in question and, instead, she worked beyond the amount of time it should have taken
to complete her route.
                                                6                                     2019001627

With respect to Claim (2), S1 explained that she initially denied Complainant’s requests for leave
because the Agency did not have coverage but indicated to Complainant that she would grant it if
she could find coverage. When she did find coverage for a day, Complainant demanded the entire
week or nothing. S1 could not find coverage for the entire week.

As to Claim (3), although S1 denied asking for medical documentation, the Postmaster admitted
that this occurred, but explained that it was due to the short notice Complainant provided to S1.
After Complainant explained the circumstances, the Postmaster approved the request without
requiring documentation.

Regarding Claim (4), S1 explained that Complainant was engaging in time wasting practices and
she simply sought to get Complainant back on task. Finally, with respect to Claim (5), S1
explained that the office was suffering from a shortage of carriers on that day, and two carriers’
regular SDOs were on Saturday, which meant that a single absence increased the burden on the
remainder of the office that day. Thus, the office received approval to mandate an employee to
come in, and Complainant was the least senior carrier available.

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency's stated reasons are merely a
pretext for discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6,
1996). Complainant can do this directly by showing that the Agency's proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of
the evidence that the Agency’s reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on the
basis of discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Complainant has not carried her burden here.
Complainant’s arguments that her male coworkers were treated more favorably are undercut by
the documentary evidence. Beyond that, Complainant argues, without evidence or testimonial
support, that S1 and the Postmaster are lying. We recognize Complainant argues that she requested
a hearing, but the record does not support her claim. Had Complainant properly requested a
hearing, she could have called witnesses in support of her claims, engaged in discovery, and cross-
examined the Agency's witnesses. As we do not have the benefit of an Administrative Judge's
credibility determinations after a hearing, we can only evaluate the facts based on the evidence of
record.

Furthermore, to the extent that Complainant claims that the alleged incidents constitute a claim of
harassment, the Commission notes that under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems,
Inc., 510 U.S. 17 (1993), a claim of hostile work environment must inevitably fail. See
Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Mar. 8,
1994). A finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that
Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by Agency management were
motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus on any of her alleged bases. See Oakley v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).
                                                  7                                     2019001627


                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)


The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision.
                                                   8                                      2019001627

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the
official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action
will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 20, 2019
Date
