              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                          Roxana Y., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Dr. Mark T. Esper,
                                           Secretary,
                                    Department of Defense
                                 (Defense Intelligence Agency),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002329

                                   Agency No. DIA201700071

                                           DECISION

On January 28, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 9, 2019, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment and discrimination based on her sex, race,
and reprisal.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as the Program Manager,
Office of the Executive Director, Planning, Performance and Outreach Division, Directorate for
Operations in Washington, D.C.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2019002329

On August 8, 2017, Complainant initiated EEO Counselor contact. On October 17, 2017 2,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that she was subjected to a hostile work environment
and discrimination on the bases of sex (female), race (African American) and in reprisal 3 when:

       1.     Complainant alleged that she was subjected to hostile work environment when:

                  a. on June 19, 2017, Complainant was reassigned from Directorate Support
                     Office (DSO) to the Defense Clandestine Service (DCS) due to “failing
                     contract requirements at the Office of Counterintelligence (OCI)”;

                  b. on June 22, 2017, Complainant’s first line supervisor (male, Caucasian,
                     prior EEO activity) (S1) issued her new performance objectives with a
                     ninety (90) day completion suspense;

                  c. in November 2017, during weekly team meetings, S1 stated that he was in
                     the process of scheduling one-on-one meetings with employees to discuss
                     the FY17 performance appraisals; however, she never received a one-on-
                     one meeting to discuss her FY17 performance appraisal;

                  d. on November 8, 2017, Complainant interviewed for a position within the
                     Directorate for Mission Services (MS), Office of Logistics & Global
                     Readiness (LOG) and was selected; however, she was unable to accept the
                     position because her termination was executed in an expeditious manner,
                     which removed her from the Agency without consideration of other
                     resolutions; and,

                  e. on December 11, 2017, Complainant received a “Notice of Termination
                     During Trial Period,” signed by Deputy Director, Office of Human
                     Resources (OHR).

       2.     on June 19, 2017, Complainant was reassigned from Directorate Support Office
              (DSO) to the Defense Clandestine Service (DCS) due to “failing contract
              requirements at the Office of Counterintelligence (OCI);

       3.     on June 22, 2017, S1 issued her new performance objectives with a ninety (90) day
              completion suspense;



2
 On December 21, 2017, Complainant amended her complaint, which was later accepted in part,
and dismissed in part.
3
  On November 16, 2017, Complainant met with the DCS Director and the Deputy Staff Director
regarding allegations of being subjected to a hostile work environment. Complainant informed
both that she engaged in the EEO complaint process for the current complaint.
                                                 3                                     2019002329

       4.      on November 8, 2017, Complainant interviewed for a position within the
               Directorate for Mission Services (MS), Office of Logistics & Global Readiness
               (LOG) and was selected; however, she was unable to accept the position because
               her termination was executed in an expeditious manner, which removed her from
               the Agency without consideration of other resolutions; and,

       5.      on December 11, 2017, Complainant received a “Notice of Termination During
               Trial Period,” signed by Deputy Director, Office of Human Resources (OHR).

On January 29, 2018, the Agency issued its acceptance/dismissal letter. The Agency noted that
claims 2 – 5 were already listed as part hostile work environment claim, but that as discrete acts,
each claim also constituted as individual claims of discrimination. The Agency accepted claims 1,
4, and 5 for investigation. The Agency dismissed claims 2 and 3 for untimely EEO Counselor
contact pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2) for failing to comply with applicable time limits
contained in 29 C.F.R. 1614.105(a)(1).

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

On September 2, 2016, Complainant was hired as the Program Manager, Office of the Executive
Director, Planning, Performance, and Outreach Division, Directorate for Operations under a two-
year trial period.

On June 19, 2017, Complainant was reassigned from Directorate Support Office (DSO) to the
Defense Clandestine Service (DCS) due to “failing contract requirements at the Office of
Counterintelligence (OCI)”. The Office Chief of the Directorate of Operations, Office of
Technical Operations (Office Chief) (male, African-American, prior EEO activity) reassigned
Complainant and another male employee (CW) (male, African-American, no prior EEO activity).
Both were reassigned to DCS as Contracting Officer Representatives (COR) based on operational
needs and would execute DCS COR initiatives until the work could be shifted to another COR.
Complainant did not believe her protected classes were factors in the reassignment, but believed
it became a factor after her reassignment. Complainant asserted that she was treated differently
regarding workload, performance, deadlines for completion tasks and attendance.

On June 22, 2017, Complainant’s first line supervisor, the Branch Chief, (male, Caucasian, prior
EEO activity) (S1) issued her new performance objectives with a ninety (90) day completion
suspense. Complainant noted that there were no scheduled meetings to discuss performance or
feedback. S1 stated that Complainant and CW arrived in June 2017, and the appraisal period for
everyone ended in September 2017. This gave Complainant and CW approximately 90 days to
achieve assigned performance objectives. S1 testified that while it is not standard to give a 90-day
completion suspense date, it was only because Complainant and CW started in June, and the
evaluation period ended in September. Complainant argued that S1’s reasons were false and
asserted that she had different objectives from CW and had some end dates in July and August.
Complainant also asserted that CW didn’t receive objectives until the end of August 2017.
                                                4                                    2019002329

Additionally, Complainant alleged that CW was a poor performing employee and was often
conducting personal matters at work. S1 noted that he documented issues with CW, and also spoke
with CW’s chain of command regarding his behavior and performance. S1 also stated that he
frequently spoke with Complainant regarding her work and performance issues.

On October 23, 2017, S1 submitted a recommendation for Complainant’s termination to the Office
of Human Resources (OHR) and Employee Management Relations (EMR). S1 stated that in his
evaluation, Complainant “has demonstrated an unwillingness to follow basic protocol and a poor
demeanor and approach towards leadership and her peers. [Complainant] has not demonstrated the
capability to perform as a full performance GG13.” S1 continued with further examples supporting
his recommendation for Complainant’s termination during her trial period.

In November 2017, during weekly team meetings, S1 stated that he was in the process of
scheduling one-on-one meetings with employees to discuss the FY17 performance appraisals.
However, Complainant asserted that she never received a one-on-one meeting to discuss her FY17
performance appraisal. Complainant noted that CW received feedback on January 3, 2018.

Complainant’s second line supervisor, the Staff Director/Division Chief (male, Caucasian, prior
EEO activity) (S2) testified that the OHR/EMR recommended not having any further one-on-one
or performance discussions with Complainant until a final decision was made on S1’s termination
recommendation. Further, by the time DCS leaders were given permission to have feedback
sessions with any of the employees, the formal request for her termination was pending, and
OHR/EMR stated that a meeting was unnecessary. S2 asserted that S1 made countless efforts to
communicate with Complainant and help her with her transition, which were consistently either
ignored or met with an unprofessional response. S2 stated that in his observation, it was
Complainant who failed to make efforts to communicate. S1 stated that he was not allowed to meet
with any employees until January 2018, and Complainant was terminated in December 2017. S1
stated that Complainant’s protected classes or prior EEO activity did not factor into his decision
to not meet with her.

On October 25, 2017, Complainant interviewed for a position within the Agency’s Directorate for
Mission Services (MS), Office of Logistics & Global Readiness (LOG). On November 8, 2017,
Complainant was selected. However, Complainant asserted that she was unable to accept the
position because her termination preempted her official offer from the LOG. The DCS Director
(male, Caucasian, prior EEO activity) (DCS Director) stated that the LOG contacted him and asked
if he would consider withdrawing the termination action on Complainant, so she could take a
position with that office. The DCS Director responded in the negative, believing it was not in the
Agency’s best interest to retain an employee who had such documented behavioral and
performance issues while assigned to DCS. S1 stated that he was unaware of Complainant’s
interview, and that documentation for Complainant’s termination was sent to OHR/EMR on
October 23, 2017. S1 stated that he became aware of the job offer after he had already submitted
his recommendation for Complainant’s termination.
                                                 5                                     2019002329

On December 11, 2017, Complainant received a “Notice of Termination During Trial Period,”
signed by Deputy Director (female, White, prior EEO activity) of the OHR. The Notice listed
several factors that impacted management’s decision to terminate Complainant, including: the
June 29, 2017 Letter of Counseling for Unsuitable Approach in the execution of her duties; failure
to complete assignments; failure to complete assignments timely; and, failure to improve
performance despite standards being repeatedly being communicated to her. The DCS Director
stated that he reviewed the recommendation letter for Complainant’s termination and concurred
with S1’s recommendation. The DCS Director noted that Complainant had issues shortly after her
reassignment. S2 stated that Complainant’s termination had nothing to do with her protected
classes or EEO activity. S2 stated that Complainant had a difficult start, and even after receiving
a Letter of Counseling, she failed to improve enough to meet Agency standards for her grade level.
S1 asserted that despite Complainant’s contentions, there was continual dialogue about
Complainant’s performance, both written and verbal. S1 noted that he tried to work with
Complainant, but she failed to meet the standards to stay in her position.

Another colleague, the Budget Analyst (male, African-American, no prior EEO activity) stated
that at the time, Complainant had been newly hired to work in another division but was suddenly
made to reassign without being consulted. The Budget Analyst stated that Complainant wasn't very
receptive to coming to DCS. He noted Complainant’s attitude of not wanting to be in DCS division
was noticeable, but that leadership didn't do all they could to help resolve the tension. Complainant
asserted that the reassignment was unexpected and drastic change and acknowledged that it put
her in a sullen mood during the transition. Complainant noted that she apologized for her actions
with S1, and that the both of them agreed to move forward with a clean slate. However, she asserted
that S1 never did so, and began to treat her differently, which ultimately led to her termination.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant asserted that the Final Agency Decision was issued in error, and that she had clearly
presented a compelling case. Complainant did not contest the Agency’s procedural dismissal of
claims 2 and 3 for untimely EEO Counselor contact. Complainant did not provide any new
arguments on appeal.

The Agency did not provide an appellate brief.
                                                 6                                      2019002329

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-
110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of
the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony
of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Disparate Treatment

Complainant alleges that she was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corporation v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, she must first establish a prima facie
case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference
of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438
U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253
(1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to
persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of
a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the factual inquiry
can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of
whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s actions were
motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714
(1983).

Unlawful Harassment

Complainant also alleged that she was subjected to unlawful harassment. A harassment claim is
examined under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).
See also Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems. Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002
(Mar. 8, 1994). To establish this claim, a complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to a
statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal
or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on
her statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment
                                                   7                                       2019002329

and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or
creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for
imputing liability.

The Supreme Court in Harris explained that an “objectively hostile or abusive work environment
[is created when] a reasonable person would find [it] hostile or abusive” and the complainant
subjectively perceives it as such. Harris, 510 U.S. at 21-22. Whether the harassment is sufficiently
severe to trigger a violation must be determined by looking at all the circumstances, including “the
frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or
humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an
employee's work performance.” Id. at 23.

A hostile work environment exists when the workplace is permeated with discriminatory
intimidation, ridicule, and insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the condition of the
complainant's employment. See Harris, supra; see also Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs.,
Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 78 (1998).

With respect to element (5) of a harassment claim, an agency is subject to vicarious liability for
harassment when it is created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority
over the employee. See Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998); Faragher v.
City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998); Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful
Harassment by Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999).

                                             ANALYSIS

As a preliminary matter, we acknowledge the Agency dismissed claims 2 and 3 pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2). Complainant did not challenge the Agency’s dismissal and we discern
no reason to disturb the dismissal.

Disparate Treatment – Claims 4 and 5

With respect to Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, assuming arguendo, that Complainant
established a prima facie case of discrimination, the Agency has articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.

Concerning claim 4, Complainant interviewed for the LOG position on October 25, 2017, and on
November 8, 2017, Complainant was selected for the position. However, Complainant asserted
that she was unable to accept the LOG position because her termination was purposefully executed
in an expeditious manner. In this matter, there is no evidence that S1, who recommended
Complainant’s termination, was aware of Complainant’s interview or offer prior to his submission
of her termination on October 23, 2017. S1’s recommendation came two days prior to
Complainant’s interview, and there is no evidence that knowledge of her offer later impacted how
quickly S1, or OHR/EMR processed her termination paperwork.
                                                 8                                     2019002329

Additionally, while the DCS Director was later asked to revoke the termination action in order for
Complainant to accept the LOG position, he asserted that it was not in the Agency’s best interest
to retain Complainant based on her performance and behavior. Management repeatedly
documented incidents throughout her employment and cited to them as factors in her termination
recommendation. Neither S1 or S2 believed retaining Complainant was a proper fit for the Agency.
Complainant’s performance and behavior is what led to her termination, and what led to S2
refusing to revoke the termination paperwork. There is no evidence that the termination process
was executed with discriminatory or retaliatory animus in order to prevent Complainant from
accepting the LOG position.

Concerning claim 5, Complainant was hired under a two-year probationary period on September
2, 2016. Complainant’s performance issues started shortly after her reassignment to DCS on June
19, 2017. The record demonstrated that just ten days after her reassignment, Complainant received
a June 29, 2017 Letter of Counseling for Unsuitable Approach in the execution of her duties. This
Letter of Counseling was one of the several factors listed in her termination notice that impacted
management’s decision to terminate Complainant, including: failure to complete assignments;
failure to complete assignments in a timely manner; and, failure to improve performance despite
standards being repeatedly being communicated to her. While Complainant argued that she was
terminated based solely on her protected classes and in reprisal, there is no evidence in the record
to support her assertions. Complainant was hired on September 2, 2016, and terminated on
December 11, 2017, within her two-year trial period.

We note that agencies generally have broad discretion to carry out personnel decisions and exercise
business judgment. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996).
Regarding adverse actions, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions for which Complainant has failed to show were pretext for discrimination. Pretext inquiry
is not concerned with bad judgment, impeccability, dislike, or a mistake. Marvin W. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120170438 (Dec. 12, 2018). The question is not whether the
agency made the best, or even a sound, business decision; it is whether the real reason is
discrimination. Mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is a pretext for
intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief, however genuine, does not
constitute evidence of pretext. The focus of pretext inquiry is whether an agency’s actions were
motivated by discriminatory animus. Further, at all times the ultimate burden of persuasion
remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency was
motivated by prohibited discrimination. Complainant has failed in this regard.

Hostile Work Environment – Claims 1(a) to 1(e)

In claims 1(a) to 1(e), Complainant alleged that she was subjected to a hostile work environment
based on her race, sex, and reprisal. As an initial matter, Complainant has established parts 1 and
2 of a prima facie case of harassment.
                                                 9                                     2019002329

To establish part 3 of her prima facie case of harassment, Complainant argued that she was treated
differently based on her protected classes and in retaliation for engaging in EEO activity for the
instant case. Complainant acknowledged that her protected classes did not factor in the
reassignment, but that it did following her reassignment to DCS. For example, she asserted that
she was given unfair performance objectives with just 90 days to complete, while her male
colleague, CW, was not given the same time frame. Additionally, Complainant claimed that while
CW was given an appraisal meeting, she was not. Complainant argued that there were clear
differences in the way CW was treated compared to her. Complainant also felt that once she
engaged in EEO activity regarding the instant matter management began to view her differently
and push her out. However, Complainant only provided her belief. As noted above, as to claims
1(d) and 1(e), we found that Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to these events
based on her protected bases.

We now turn to part 4 of the prima face case of harassment. In claims 1(a) to 1(e), Complainant
raised events in which she argued was clearly a hostile work environment perpetuated by S1.
Complainant acknowledged that when she was first reassigned, the transition made her sullen and
question her future with the Agency. However, Complainant noted that she apologized for any
impact it had on her performance and noted that she and S1 agreed to move forward with a clean
slate. However, Complainant argued that S1 clearly harbored resentment towards her as she was
given performance objectives with just three months to complete, never given performance
feedback, and ultimately terminated from her position. Moreover, Complainant felt that
management, particularly S1, harbored so much hostility that he intentionally pushed through her
termination paperwork to prevent her from accepting a position within another department of the
Agency. Analyzing the record as a whole, we do not find sufficient evidence that any of these
incidents were motivated by discriminatory animus which created a hostile work environment.

Further, we note that not every unpleasant or undesirable action which occurs in the workplace
constitutes an EEO violation. See Shealey v. Equal Emp’t Opportunity Comm’n, EEOC Appeal
No. 0120070356 (Apr. 18, 2011) (citing Epps v. Dep't of Transp., EEOC Appeal No. 0120093688
(Dec. 19, 2009). We have consistently held that the discrimination statutes are not general civility
codes. Lassiter v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120122332 (Oct. 10, 2012) (personality
conflicts, general workplace disputes, trivial slights and petty annoyances between a supervisor
and a complainant do not rise to the level of harassment). “Conduct that is not severe or pervasive
enough to create an objectively hostile or abusive work environment—an environment that a
reasonable person would find hostile or abusive—is beyond Title VII’s purview.” Harris, 510 U.S.,
at 21, citing Meritor, 477 U.S., at 67.

Moreover, ordinary managerial duties include assuring compliance with agency policy and
procedures, monitoring subordinates, scheduling the workload, scrutinizing and evaluating
performance, providing job-related advice and counsel, taking action in the face of performance
shortcomings and to otherwise manage the workplace. Erika v. Dep’t of Transportation, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120151781 (June 16, 2017).
                                                10                                     2019002329

We also note that a finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that
Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by
retaliatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).
Based on the record, we conclude that Complainant has not shown that she was subjected to events
which, taken as a whole, created an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment based on
her protected groups or based on her engaging in protected EEO activity.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding that it did not
discriminate against Complainant as alleged.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other
party. Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                  11                                      2019002329

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 19, 2020
Date
