              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Joanna G., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Eugene Scalia,
                                         Secretary,
                                    Department of Labor
                            (Employment Standards Administration),
                                          Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019005865

                                  Agency No. DOL-11-02-134

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) concerning her complaint of unlawful employment discrimination alleging a
violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C.
§ 621 et seq.

Complainant worked as a Criminal Investigator at the Agency’s Office of Labor Management
facility in Iselin, New Jersey. On September 19, 2011, Complainant filed a formal complaint
alleging that the Agency subjected her to discrimination on the basis of age when, in August 2011,
she was notified that due to the closing of the New Jersey work site, she was assigned to the New
York District Office in New York, New York.

The complaint was investigated and when Complainant did not request a hearing, the Agency
issued a final Agency decision finding no discrimination. Complainant appealed the decision to
the Commission, and in Appeal No. 0120122722 (August 8, 2014), we affirmed the Agency’s
findings. Neither party sought reconsideration of the decision.

In the appeal before us, Complainant’s attorney states that he did not receive a copy of the report
of the investigation until June 4, 2019, and that an EEOC Administrative Judge dismissed the
request for a hearing on June 30, 2019, because a FAD had already been issued.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                     2019005865

In response to the appeal, the Agency included a copy of a letter dated April 3, 2012, wherein the
attorney stated, “A report of investigation dated March 14, 2012 has been provided to
[Complainant]… .”

Regardless, the matter has already been addressed by the Commission. The proper time for
Complainant to have raised arguments regarding the report of investigation or her request for a
hearing was when she filed her earlier appeal or in a subsequent request for reconsideration. At
this juncture, the instant appeal is barred by res judicata.

The appeal is DISMISSED.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   3                                      2019005865

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 9, 2020
Date
