              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Aracely J., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                       Megan J. Brennan,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                         (Eastern Area),
                                            Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2019000303
                                  Agency No. 4C-080-0012-18

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 18, 2018, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the
Agency’s final decision.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the Agency properly concluded that Complainant did not prove that
she was denied a reasonable accommodation for her disability and subjected to sex or race
discrimination.
                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a full-time Carrier
Technician at the Vineland, New Jersey Post Office. Complainant began working for the Agency
in March 2014. In June 2017, Complainant informed management that she was pregnant. On
September 18, 2017, while carrying mail on her Route, Complainant experienced a medical
emergency that caused her to go to the hospital emergency room (ER).


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2019000303

On that date, Complainant’s physician (Dr1) restricted her from lifting more than 15 pounds. Dr1
also stated that Complainant should be provided with a lunch for each eight-hour period and a 15-
minute break every four hours. On September 22, 2017, Complainant fell while stepping out of
an Agency vehicle (LLV) and delivering mail. After being treated at the ER, Complainant was
cleared to return to work on September 23, 2017.

On September 23, 2017, managers conducted a pre-disciplinary interview with Complainant and
instructed her to “sit” at work until further notice. Subsequently, Complainant was given a slip to
request temporary light duty and instructed to clock out and go home. On September 25, 2017,
Complainant submitted a temporary light duty request form. On October 7, 2017, the Agency
issued Complainant a Notice of Seven Day Suspension for unsatisfactory work performance. The
Notice stated that Complainant’s “inattentiveness to carefully place [her] left leg on the surface
ground caused [her] to fall.”

On February 9, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint in which she alleged that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (African-American), sex (pregnancy), and disability
when:

       1.      From September 26, 2017, through January 24, 2018, she was not accommodated
               when she was not permitted to work; and

       2.      On or about October 7, 2017, she was issued a Seven-Day Suspension.

In an investigative statement, Complainant stated that she notified the Agency that she was
restricted from lifting more than 15 pounds on September 18, 2017. However, Complainant stated
that she was able to ride routes, and she requested to work on such a route as an accommodation.
Complainant stated that management never responded to her request although there were several
(riding) routes on which she could have performed. Complainant also stated that two Caucasian
male Carriers with foot/leg issues were assigned to riding routes, although one of the Carriers was
not required to submit medical documentation in order to obtain an accommodation. Additionally,
Complainant stated that a pregnant Hispanic female employee was temporarily reassigned to a
riding route for four to five months.

Complainant further stated that her complaint was “not about being written up and receiving a 7
Day Suspension,” it was about not being accommodated while other Carriers were accommodated.
Complainant stated that she filed a grievance about the suspension, but she was nevertheless
suspended for seven days.

The Supervisor of Customer Services (S1) stated that the day after Complainant fell while working,
she brought in paperwork from the ER that stated that she was released to work full duty. S1
further stated that Complainant’s pregnancy did not affect her at work until she became dizzy and
her legs wobbled on September 18, 2017. S1 stated that the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) called 911
when Complainant experienced those symptoms, but she returned to work the next day.
                                                3                                     2019000303

S1 stated that on September 22, 2017, Complainant fell while working, but she was cleared for
full duty after going to the ER. S1 stated that Complainant then informed her that she had a 15-
pound lifting restriction from Dr1, and she provided her with documentation regarding the
restriction on September 23, 2017. S1 stated that when Complainant presented her with
documentation of her restriction, she explained to Complainant that there was no light duty work
for Complainant within her lifting restriction. S1 stated that she did not permit Complainant to
work and gave her a light duty request form. S1 further stated that when Complainant returned to
work on September 25, 2017, with the light duty request form, she informed her that no work was
available for her. S1 stated that Complainant could not ride routes because it involved lifting and
loading trays and parcels.

After the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the
time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

Final Agency Decision

In its final decision, the Agency characterized Complainant’s complaint as alleging race and
sex/pregnancy discrimination. The Agency found that Complainant failed to establish a prima
facie case of sex or race discrimination because she did not show that similarly situated employees
outside her protected classes were treated more favorably under similar circumstances. The
Agency further found that the Agency provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanations for its
actions that were not proven to be pretext for unlawful discrimination. Thus, the decision
concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected Complainant to race or sex
discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant reiterates her contention that she was denied the opportunity to work
although there was work available that she could perform, including delivering on an open-
mounted route. The Agency did not present any arguments on appeal.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).
                                                  4                                     2019000303


                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As an initial matter, we note that the Agency’s final decision did not fully address the matters
raised in Complainant’s complaint. In her formal complaint, Complainant indicated that she was
alleging she was subjected to discrimination on the bases of race and disability, but the Agency’s
final decision characterizes Complainant as only alleging discrimination based on race and sex.
While Complainant alleges that the Agency did not provide her with an accommodation for
medical restrictions related to her pregnancy, during the investigation Complainant clearly
indicated that she was alleging that the Agency denied her a reasonable accommodation because
of her disability. Additionally, Complainant alleges that she was subjected to disparate treatment
because of her race and sex (pregnancy). Despite the erroneous characterization of her complaint
in the Agency’s final decision, we determine that the investigative record is adequately developed
for us to review Complainant’s reasonable accommodation claim.

Further, we note that during the investigation, Complainant disavowed claim 2 as a matter that she
is challenging in her complaint. Therefore, we restrict our review to claim 1.

Reasonable Accommodation

Under the Commission's regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to
the known physical and mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability
unless the agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §
1630.9. An individual with a disability is ““qualified” if he or she satisfies the requisite skill,
experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the employment position that the
individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the
essential functions of such position. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).

During the relevant period, Complainant had a 15-pound lifting restriction, and based on
Commission precedent, we conclude that Complainant is an individual with a disability. See Bill
A. v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120131989 (Oct. 26, 2016) (Complainant restricted
from stooping/bending and lifting no more than 15 pounds is an individual with a disability);
Lapointe v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01992460 (June 27, 2002) (Commission has
consistently held that 20-pound lifting restriction renders an individual substantially limited in the
major life activity of lifting).

The record reflects that during the relevant period, Complainant could not perform the essential
duties of her Carrier position because of her lifting restriction, and as such, she was not qualified
for her Carrier Technician position. Complainant contends that the Agency failed to accommodate
her by reassigning her to a riding route. However, management stated that riding routes frequently
involve lifting and loading trays and parcels that exceeded 15 pounds. Complainant does not
dispute that working on riding routes would involve such duties.
                                                  5                                     2019000303

As such, we do not find that reassigning Complainant to riding routes would have provided her
with an effective accommodation, and there is no evidence that there was a vacant position within
her restrictions to which she could have been reassigned. Therefore, we conclude that Complainant
did not prove the Agency denied her a reasonable accommodation for her disability.

Disparate Treatment

To the extent that Complainant contends that the Agency’s failure to reassign her constituted
disparate treatment, Complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the
Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must
initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that she was subjected to an adverse
employment action under circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco
Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary
depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n. 13. The
burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions.
Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail,
Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency’s explanation is
pretextual. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's
Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

In this case, for purposes of analysis, we assume arguendo that Complainant established a prima
facie case of race and sex discrimination. Nevertheless, we find that the Agency provided
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Specifically, S1 stated that she did not permit
Complainant to work after she disclosed she had a 15-pound lifting restriction because there was
no work available consistent with that restriction.

Another supervisor (S2) stated that all routes require employees to receive mails in tubs, and
Complainant’s restrictions indicated that she was unable to lift all tubs associated with the route
because magazines and catalogue tubs frequently weigh more than Complainant’s lifting
restriction. Additionally, S2 stated that Complainant’s lifting restriction meant that she could not
case or load her vehicle.

In an attempt to prove pretext, Complainant maintains that other employees with restrictions were
provided with light duty assignments. However, S1 stated that one of the employees Complainant
compared herself had not worked at Vineland in four years, and none of the three comparative
employees had asked S1 for light duty. S1 stated that one of the employees was on long-term sick
leave for a while and returned to full duty. S1 further stated that in or about October 2017, another
employee (Caucasian male) submitted documentation revealing a five or ten-pound lifting
restriction, and he was also not allowed to work because of the restriction.

Upon review, we find that there is no evidence that the comparative employees had lifting
restrictions like Complainant’s restriction. Moreover, there is no persuasive evidence that
establishes that they were reassigned under similar circumstances.
                                                  6                                     2019000303

We conclude that Complainant did not prove that the Agency’s nondiscriminatory explanations
are pretext for unlawful discrimination. Therefore, we find that the Agency properly found that
Complainant did not prove she was subjected to unlawful discrimination or denied a reasonable
accommodation for her disability.
                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision for the reasons set forth herein.

                            STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   7                                      2019000303

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 20, 2019
Date
