              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Lamar M., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       William P. Barr,
                                      Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                              (Drug Enforcement Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019004301

                                 Hearing No. 550-2017-00313X

                                 Agency No. DEA-2016-01123

                                           DECISION

On June 24, 2019, Complainant contacted the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission) noting that he had yet to receive a Final Agency Decision (FAD), and that
he wished to file an appeal. The Agency later issued a FAD on July 26, 2019, concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of
Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C.
§ 621 et seq.

For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected him to discrimination based on his protected classes and in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                     2019004301

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Special
Agent/Confidential Informant Coordinator at the Agency’s Field Division in Seattle, Washington.

On November 2, 2016 2, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of disability (physical), age (56), and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:

    1. on September 27, 2016, Complainant’s first line supervisor, the Group Supervisor, yelled
       and raised his voice at Complainant and said, “do you want to see nasty,” and threatened
       Complainant;

    2. from October 2016 through November 9, 2016, Complainant was subjected to disparate
       treatment regarding mandatory firearms training 3 and,

    3. on December 2, 2016, Complainant’s extension for mandatory retirement at the age of 57
       was denied.

The Agency dismissed claim 1 for failure to state a claim pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1).
The Agency determined that Complainant was not aggrieved by the action. The Agency accepted
the rest of the complaint for investigation. The investigative record reflects the following pertinent
matters relating to the subject claim.

At the time of events, Complainant’s first line supervisor was the Group Supervisor (RMO1) (over
40, no stated disability or EEO activity) and his second line supervisor was the Assistant Special
Agent in Charge (RMO2) (over 40, no stated disability or EEO activity).

On August 30, 2016, the Chief of the Agency’s Employee Benefits and Retirement Unit, notified
Complainant, who was subject to department wide mandatory retirement at age 57, that the Agency
“has the authority to grant exemptions to mandatory retirement . . . in those cases where the
Administrator determines that the continuation of the [Special Agent]’s services would promote
the needs of the [Agency] in fulfilling its mission and it is in the public interest.”

On November 3, 2016, Complainant wrote to the Special Agent in Charge (RMO3) (over 40, no
stated disability or EEO activity) requesting for an “exemption to [his] mandatory retirement” so
that he could continue to serve the “the [Agency’s] Seattle Field Division Office for 12 months
beyond [his] mandatory retirement date of August 6, 2017.” Complainant noted that another
Special Agent (SA), located in St. Louis, Missouri, had been granted an extension and held a
similar job to Complainant.


2
  Complainant’s complaint was amended, and accepted, twice.
3
  Complainant acknowledged that his treatment in connection with his mandatory firearms
qualification was not related to his age.
                                                  3                                      2019004301

Complainant believed that because they held similar jobs, he should be granted an extension as
well. Complainant asserted that his role as a Confidential Source Coordinator required diligent
attention to ever evolving standards, and that his skill and knowledge set would be difficult to
replace. He noted that while he was in the process of submitting his extension, he was informed
that his medical condition might bar him from receiving an extension. This was later clarified to
be a mistake, and he proceeded with the extension request.

Regarding the firearms qualification, the Agency held a standard, biannual mandatory firearms
qualification for all relevant employees. The Principal Firearms Instructor (RMO4) was
responsible for firearms qualifications and training. Due to Complainant’s prior injury, RMO4 has
previously modified the course twice, in November 2015 and June 2016, so that Complainant
could participate 4 without aggravating his condition. RMO3 noted that while Complainant
participated and passed both modifications, it was still not without aggravation to his knee.

On November 7, 2016, Complainant asserted that RMO4 informed him that he was not allowed to
qualify anymore per RMO1’s instructions. Complainant reported this statement to the Agency’s
EEO office. The next day, RMO4 denied making such a statement and instructed Complainant to
go to the range on November 9, 2016 for modified qualifications. RMO4 informed Complainant
that he should arrive between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.so that the modified course could be held
before the unmodified course was scheduled at 9:30 a.m.

On November 9, 2016, Complainant arrived for the modified course. However, he was not in gear
until 9:20am and RMO4 informed him it was too late to run the unmodified course. RMO4
presented Complainant with three options: reschedule Complainant’s qualification course; leave
and return later in the day; or wait. Complainant waited. During the modified course Complainant
stood on a flat, concrete surface, and shot targets from the required distances. Complainant finished
the course with a qualifying score.

In late November 2016, a committee of three individuals, per Agency policy, the Chief of
Operations, the Assistant Administrator for Human Resources and the Acting Deputy
Administrator reviewed Complainant’s mandatory retirement extension request. Management
noted that extensions were granted only if: the employee had a special skill that no one else could
learn quickly; if the employee cannot be replaced; if it is in the interest of the public to extend the
mandatory retirement date for an employee; or it is mission essential to keep the employee. The
committee unanimously denied Complainant’s request because it was determined that the Agency
could readily fill Complainant’s position with another qualified special agent with little to no
disruption. The request was then forwarded to RMO3 who followed the committee’s
recommendation. On December 2, 2016, Complainant was informed of the denial.




4
  In 1996, Complainant was injured on the job, he fractured his foot which subsequently led to a
severe knee injury. Complainant has had continuous health issues related to the injury which have
required numerous surgeries, and he cannot twist or bend quickly and/or with ease.
                                                4                                     2019004301

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but
subsequently withdrew his request. On March 14, 2019, the AJ remanded the matter to the agency
to issue a FAD within 60 days pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). On June 24, 2019 5,
Complainant contacted the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission)
noting that he had yet to receive a Final Agency Decision (FAD), despite the length of time that
had passed. He expressed his dissatisfaction with the length of time and the processing of his
complaint, he stated that he wished to file an appeal. On June 28, 2019 the Commission informed
the Agency of the appeal, and obligation to upload the record. On or about July 16, 2019, the
Agency responded to the Commission noting that the FAD was not issued yet, but one would be
forthcoming. On July 26, 2019, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
him to discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant’s statement to the Commission on appeal raises his dissatisfaction with how long the
Agency was taking to issue its FAD. Complainant did not file any response to the Agency’s July
26, 2019 FAD.

The Agency asserted that Complainant failed to demonstrate a prima facie case of discrimination
or retaliation and, in even if he were able to do so, the Agency had articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory and non-retaliatory reasons for its actions in connection with Complainant’s
mandatory firearms qualification and for denying Complainant’s request for an extension to the
mandatory retirement age of 57. The Agency requested that the Commission affirm its FAD.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).




5
 Also, on this date, Complainant contacted the Agency to express his dissatisfaction with the
Agency’s delay in issuing the FAD. Shortly after, he was informed that the office was severely
backlogged and that his complaint was being processed.
                                                 5                                      2019004301

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As a preliminary matter, we do not find reason to disturb the Agency’s procedural dismissal of
Claim 1 for failure to state a claim.

Additionally, the Commission will address Complainant's dissatisfaction regarding the delay in
the issuance of the Final Agency Decision (FAD). Complainant contacted the Agency on or about
June 24, 2019 and provided his dissatisfaction with the length of time the Agency was utilizing to
process his complaint. The Agency responded, noting its severe backlog of cases, and assured
Complainant that his complaint was in process. On July 26, 2019, the Agency issued the FAD.
Here, Agency officials provided the FAD approximately one month after Complainant’s contact,
and four months after the AJ remanded the matter for a FAD. We find that the Agency sufficiently
addressed Complainant’s dissatisfaction with the processing of his complaint.

Complainant alleges that he was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567
(1978).

The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Tx. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has
met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's
Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the factual inquiry
can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of
whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s actions were
motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714
(1983).

With respect to Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, assuming arguendo, that Complainant
established a prima facie case of age and disability 6 discrimination and reprisal for his protected
EEO activity, the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
Specifically, that Complainant had a history of issues with his knee which would have made it
either difficult, or aggravate his condition, for him to run through the unmodified course.


6
 For the purposes of analysis, we assume Complainant is an individual with a disability. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1630.2(g)(1).
                                                6                                     2019004301

As a result of past modifications and desire to provide Complainant a better modification, RMO4
chose a new modification that allowed Complainant to stand in place and shoot strategically placed
targets.

Due to this modification, RMO4 advised Complainant that he would need to arrive earlier than the
9:30 a.m. non-modified course. RMO4 did not want to mix a non-modified and modified course
at the same time. However, Complainant failed to be in gear in a timely fashion and therefore could
not take the course prior to 9:30 a.m. Complainant was provided with three options and chose to
wait. There is no evidence that RMO4, or any other manager, intentionally or discriminatorily
forced Complainant to wait to take the modified course. Despite his arguments, there is no
indication that RMO1, RMO2, and/or RMO4 devised a modified course to discriminate or retaliate
against him. Nor was the delay in participating in the course the result of anything other than
Complainant’s own acknowledged delay in arriving at the course, ready to shoot, by 9:00 a.m.
Ultimately, Complainant passed the modified course with a qualifying score.

Regarding the mandatory retirement age, Complainant sought to extend his mandatory retirement
age by a year. Complainant asserted that a comparable employee, SA, held a similar position as he
and was granted an extension. In this matter, SA was in another state with different circumstances
which allowed for his extension. The Agency noted that the process for receiving an extension was
reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The Agency specified here that Complainant’s position did not
qualify for an extension as his role was something that could be passed onto an existing employee
with little to no disruption to the Agency. Complainant argued that any reason used to deny his
extension request was clearly pretext for discrimination and retaliation. Complainant claimed that
he had a unique knowledge and skill set that would be hard to replace. Additionally, he argued that
it would be in the interest of the Agency and public if he were granted an exemption. In this case,
the three-person committee, and RMO3 agreed, that Complainant’s position could be filled with
another special agent, with again, little to no disruption to Agency operations. Despite his
assertions, there is no evidence that Complainant’s role could not be filled, with little to no
disruption, by another qualified special agent as determined by the committee.

We note that actions taken by the alleged discriminating officials were routine managerial actions,
as such, these actions will not be second-guessed by the Commission. We note that agencies
generally have broad discretion to carry out personnel decisions and exercise business judgment.
Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admn., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996). Moreover, even in
arguing that such reasons were mere pretext for discrimination and retaliation, we find that
Complainant has failed to provide any persuasive evidence to support his claims. The ultimate
burden of persuasion remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency was motivated by prohibited discrimination and retaliation. Complainant
has failed in this regard.
                                                   7                                    2019004301

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding that it did not
discriminate or retaliate against Complainant as alleged.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or the
agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the
applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
                                                   8                                      2019004301

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 29, 2020
Date
