              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Kenyatta S.,1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                       Megan J. Brennan,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                         (Pacific Area),
                                            Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2019001935

                                    Agency No. 1F946003418

                                            DECISION

On December 3, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 6, 2018, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Postal Support
Employee (PSE)2 Mail Processing Clerk Mail Processing Clerk at the Oakland Processing and
Distribution Center in Oakland, California. Complainant was considered a probationary employee
during the relevant time-frame. On June 11, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of disability (aortic valve regurgitation) and
reprisal (prior protected EEO activity) when: (1) on an unspecified date, she was not provided with
reasonable accommodation; and (2) on March 6, 2018, she was issued a Notice of Separation.




1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  PSE is a non-career position.
                                                  2                                     2019001935

After the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination or reprisal as alleged.

                                   FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Claim 1 – Denial of a Reasonable Accommodation

Complainant stated that she experiences complications from moderate aortic valve regurgitation,
which was first diagnosed in April 2017 and is expected to be life-long. In May 2017, Complainant
submitted Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) documentation indicating that she experiences
shortness of breath with elevated blood pressure and that she was limited to a 40-hour workweek
until July 2017.

Complainant alleged that she informed her first-line supervisor (S1) of her medical condition on
the day of her 90-day evaluation and provided supporting documentation from her doctor.3 The
only medical documentation in the record during this timeframe was the FMLA documentation
stating that Complainant was only limited to a 40-hour work week. Complainant claimed her job
performance was affected by management's refusal to provide her with an accommodation because
she became extremely fatigued and faint while operating the delivery bar code sorter machine
alone, which was a two-person job. Complainant asserted that on March 4, 2018, she went to
speak to her union representative (U1) to get assistance to file a grievance, but she was terminated
before it was completed. Complainant asserted she did not get a chance to complete a request for
reasonable accommodation because she was terminated two days after her meeting with U1.

The record contains documentation from April 2018, after Complainant’s termination, indicating
that she was limited to part-time hours and restricted to no lifting, pushing or pulling anything over
50 pounds. She testified that her normal job duties required her to lift/push/pull objects well over
50 pounds.

S1 denied that Complainant requested a meeting between herself and U1 regarding reasonable
accommodation. S1 also stated she was not aware that Complainant experienced complications
from any medical condition or physical limitations and has not received any medical
documentation from Complainant.




3
 Complainant received a performance review/probationary evaluation on February 14, 2018,
which appears to be the evaluation at issue. Complainant received a rating of “Unsatisfactory”
with respect to the “Dependability” factor in her evaluation.
                                                   3                                      2019001935

Complainant’s second-line supervisor (S2) testified that Complainant told her on March 6, 2018
(i.e., the date of separation), that she had a medical condition but did not disclose the nature of that
condition; and, has given no documentation related to her medical condition.

Claim 2 - Notice of separation

The record shows that the basis for the Notice of Separation was failure to be regular in attendance.
Complainant asserted that she was separated not because of her attendance but because the
management team looked upon her as a liability and no longer wanted her to be employed there.
Complainant also claimed that she called in only when she was ill and submitted documentation
from a medical doctor to support the absences. S2 asserted that the Notice of Separation was
based upon Complainant’s numerous unscheduled absences between December 19, 2017 and
February 26, 2018.

                                   ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination against qualified disabled individuals. See
29 C.F.R. § 1630. To establish that Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation,
Complainant must show that: (1) she is an individual with a disability, as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1630.2(g); (2) she is a qualified individual with a disability pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m);
and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See Enforcement Guidance:
Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
EEOC No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002). Under the Commission's regulations, an Agency is required
to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified
individual with a disability unless the Agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue
hardship. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o) and (p).

Assuming, without deciding, that Complainant is an individual with a disability, the Commission
finds that there is no evidence that Complainant ever requested an accommodation for her medical
condition prior to her termination. Complainant asserted that she informed S1 that she had a
medical condition during her probationary evaluation in or around February 2018. Complainant
further stated that she provided supporting documentation to S1.
                                                   4                                      2019001935

S1 denied that Complainant informed her of any medical condition or provided her any
documentation indicating that she had a medical condition. Complainant claimed that she
requested a meeting with U1 on March 4, 2018, to get assistance, but she was terminated before
she could request an accommodation. All management officials, who submitted affidavits for the
record, attested that they were not aware of Complainant’s medical condition or need for
accommodation. Prior to Complainant’s termination, the only documentation in the record
indicates that Complainant was limited to a 40-hour workweek. There is no evidence, nor did
Complainant claim, that she ever worked beyond this limitation.

We note that Complainant did not request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, and
as a result we do not have the benefit of an Administrative Judge's credibility determinations of
the witnesses in this case. In addition, there is no documentary evidence (i.e. doctor's letters, and/or
medical documentation addressed to the Agency) to support Complainant's allegation that she
actually requested an accommodation prior to her termination. As such, we find that Complainant
did not establish that she was denied reasonable accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation
Act as alleged.

Disparate Treatment

Complainant must satisfy a three-part evidentiary scheme to prevail on a claim of disparate
treatment discrimination. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). First,
Complainant must establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that she was subjected to an
adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference of
discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S.
567, 576 (1978). Second, the burden is on the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory,
reason for its actions. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Third,
should the Agency carry its burden, Complainant must then have an opportunity to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the legitimate reasons offered by the Agency were not its true
reasons, but were a pretext for discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804; St. Mary's
Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

We assume for purposes of this decision that Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination and reprisal. Here, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons
for Complainant’s termination. Namely, Complainant was terminated during her probationary
period for her failure to be regular in attendance. The record indicates that Complainant
accumulated 40 hours of unscheduled leave between December 2017 and February 2018.
Complainant had previously been informed on several occasions that her failure to be regular in
attendance could result in disciplinary action.

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency's stated reasons are merely a
pretext for discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6,
1996). Complainant can do this directly by showing that the Agency's proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence. Tx. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.
                                                  5                                     2019001935

At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of
the evidence that the Agency’s reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on the
basis of discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Complainant has not carried his burden here.
Accordingly, the Commission finds that Complainant has not established that she was subjected
to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.

                                          CONCLUSION

Accordingly, based on a thorough review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision
finding that Complainant failed to prove discrimination or retaliation as alleged.4

                            STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                                RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

         1.    The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
                law; or

         2.    The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
                operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other
party. Failure to file within the time-period will result in dismissal of your request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


4
    We note that Complainant did not raise any arguments on appeal.
                                                   6                                      2019001935

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 12, 2020
Date
