              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                          Clemente B.,1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                     Kevin K. McAleenan,
                                        Acting Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                            (Transportation Security Administration),
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2019005309

                                    Appeal No. 0120181653

                                Agency No. HS-TSA-00035-2017

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120181653 (June 11, 2019). EEOC
regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to reconsider any
previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting
party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant was employed as an Expert Behavior Detection Officer at the Agency’s O’Hare
International Airport in Chicago, Illinois. Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging he was
discriminated against and subjected to a hostile work environment on the basis of reprisal for
engaging in prior EEO activity when: (1) since March 2016, and specifically on September 25,
2016, and October 9, 2016, management denied his request for sick leave for care of a family
member with a serious health condition; (2) on or about October 1, 2016, management placed
him in an absent without leave (AWOL) status for using sick leave for care of a family member
with a serious health condition; (3) on or about October 15, 2016, management denied his jury


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2019005309

duty leave request and placed him in an AWOL status; and (4) on or about October of 2016,
management lowered his Transportation Officer Performance System score rating.

Complainant did not request a hearing. Our prior appellate decision affirmed the Agency’s final
decision based on the evidence developed during the investigation that concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to unlawful retaliation as alleged.
Our decision found that Complainant did not produce any evidence to show that management’s
actions were motivated by unlawful animus.

In his request for reconsideration, Complainant expresses his disagreement with the previous
decision and repeats some arguments he made previously. We emphasize that a request for
reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. See EEO MD-110, Ch. 9, § VII.A.
Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial
impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not done so
here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120181653 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  3                                      2019005309

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 10, 2019
Date
