              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Carol K., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                          Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                       (Great Lakes Area),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019004022

                                  Hearing No. 471201300035X

                                    Agency No. 1J482000909

                                           DECISION

Complainant appealed, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403, from the Agency’s April 18, 2019 Final
Order concerning an equal employment opportunity (“EEO”) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (“Title VII”), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (“Rehabilitation
Act”), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was a former Mail Handler
Equipment Operator (Hi-lo or Forklift Operator), PS-05, at the Agency’s Metroplex Processing
and Distribution Center (“P&DC”) in Pontiac, Michigan.

On April 20, 2009, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of disability (torn ligament, thoracic spine, degenerative cervical disc
disease, lumbar disc herniation with bilateral radiculopathy, bilateral sacroiliac dysfunction,
chronic lower back pain) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, beginning on or about


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019004022

January 6, 2009, it did not allow him to return to his bid assignment as a Mail Handler Equipment
Operator.

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (“EEOC” or “Commission”) Administrative Judge (“AJ”). Complainant
timely requested a hearing. On October 22, 2014, the AJ held a hearing, and on March 29, 2019,
she issued a decision on the matter.

The record provides the following facts:

On October 26, 1996, Complainant was awarded a Level 5 bid position as a Mail Handler
Equipment Operator at Royal Oak P&DC, in the nearby Troy Automation Facility (“TAF”).
Complainant sustained severe on the job injuries in 1997, resulting in his disability. After partial
recovery, Complainant was assigned limited duty positions based on the Department of Labor
Office of Workers Compensation Programs (“OWCP”) and his physician’s assessment of his
restrictions and limitations. Under Agency policies and the Negotiated Agreement between the
Agency and the Union, Complainant maintained his seniority and restoration rights should he
recover to a point where he could perform the duties of his bid position.

In 2008, mail handling operations from Royal Oak P&DC and TAF were transferred to a new
facility, Metroplex P&DC. Sometime afterward, Complainant initiated an EEO complaint
(Agency Case No. 1J482001707) after unsuccessfully bidding for a Sack Sorting Machine
Operator position. The alleged responsible management officials included multiple Operations
Distribution Managers (“MDOs”) and the Metroplex P&DC Senior Plant Manager (“M1”).

On September 9, 2008, Complainant, on the advice of counsel, entered into a binding settlement
agreement with the Agency to resolve his EEO complaint, which provided in part:

   Term 1      The [Agency] will restructure [Complainant’s] limited duty job offer dated
               May 22, 2007 to reassign him to work flat prep on the Al flat sorting
               equipment on Tour 1 at the Metroplex P&DC.

   Term 4      The new modified job assignment will remain in effect until and unless
               [Complainant’s] physician changes his medical restrictions to impose
               limitations preventing him from continuing to perform the duties of the
               assignment or until [Complainant] successfully bids into some other
               assignment.

When he entered into the agreement, Complainant had not worked on the A1 Flat Sorter machine
before, but believed the assignment would be within his medical restrictions. However, he said
that once he began the assignment, he was on his feet for hours at a time, and regularly required to
lift over 50 pounds, causing him excruciating pain and exacerbating his disabilities. Complainant’s
mental and physical health were so impacted that he was frequently absent and lost income.
                                                 3                                      2019004022

Light Duty Request 1

On October 15, 2008, Complainant submitted a light duty request to M1 and asked to return to his
bid position. Complainant had observed that the new Metroplex P&DC had very smooth floors.
Recalling that TAF had bumpy, uneven floors which could make driving a forklift painful,
Complainant concluded that if he returned to his bid job, but at the Metroplex facility, he could do
so without limitations. His request contained medical restrictions provided by his physician
including (but not limited to) lifting up to 15 pounds, no overhead reaching/lifting, pushing/pulling
up to 70 pounds, and “may drive Hi-Lo on smooth surfaces only.”

On January 6, 2009, an MDO at Metroplex P&DC (“M2”) denied Complainant’s light duty
request, explaining that Complainant must be “cleared by Medical Unit due to [the September 9,
2008 Settlement Agreement] made through the Accommodations Committee. Until documentation
is received [Complainant] will continue working under [his] settlement.” Complainant contacted
the Medical Unit and was informed that his light duty request just needed Management’s approval.
M2 testified that he understood Complainant had been placed in his position as part of a settlement
agreement, so consulted M1, who directed him to the MDO who was familiar with the agreement.
That MDO, along with two of the Agency’s Labor Relations representatives, and Agency counsel,
all advised M2 to deny the request because of the September 9, 2008 settlement agreement.

On or about January 9, 2009, Complainant initiated the instant EEO Complaint. Complainant
contends that the September 9, 2008 agreement was not intended to keep him in the A1 Flat Sorter
position if he was able to qualify for his bid position. He argues that he successfully bid on the
Mail Handler Equipment Operator position in October, when he determined it was within his
medical restrictions.

Light Duty Request 2

On December 23, 2008 Complainant submitted another light duty request, with updated
restrictions from his physician, allowing him to lift up to 25 pounds and push/pull up to 100
pounds, and maintaining the previous restrictions. After the January 6, 2009 denial of
Complainant’s first request, the Union resubmitted both Light Duty Requests on Complainant’s
behalf on January 9, 2009, and initiated a grievance.

On January 13, 2009 M1 approved the updated restrictions in Complainant’s December 23, 2008
light duty request. However, M1 did not reassign Complainant to his bid position. Along with the
approval of light duty restrictions, M1 responded, in reference to the settlement agreement, that
Complainant was assigned to A1 Operation, and the “[c]urrent work being provided is within these
medical restrictions.” Complainant notified the EEO counselor.

On April 18 and 22, 2009, Complainant filed formal EEO complaints for the denied requests that
were later consolidated into the instant complaint. According to Complainant, both of his light
duty requests established that he was qualified to work his bid job, but M1 and M2 refused to allow
him to exercise his restoration rights.
                                                4                                     2019004022

Effective October 31, 2009, Complainant accepted a voluntary retirement package rather than
continue to work at the A1 Sorter position.

On November 10, 2009, the Agency issued a Final Decision dismissing Complainant’s April 2009
EEO complaints. Complainant timely appealed.

EEOC Appeal No. 01201000928 (Aug. 17, 2012)

On August 17, 2012, the Commission reversed the Agency’s dismissal and ordered it to conduct
a supplemental investigation (EEOC Appeal No. 01201000928). The Commission found the
investigative record inadequate because the Agency improperly framed Complainant’s light duty
requests as requests for a reasonable accommodation, as opposed to a request to return to his bid
position. The Commission determined that Complainant had raised a disparate treatment claim,
citing his Formal Complaints, one of which alleged:

       I entered into an [EEO] settlement… that did not preclude me from bidding on other
       positions that I could perform with or without restrictions. I bid on and was
       awarded a job, and [the Agency] refused to let me work it.

In its order, the Commission listed the information the Agency needed to obtain in order to provide
a sufficient record to determine Complainant’s disparate treatment allegation. Among other things,
this included the Agency’s procedures if an employee requests to return to his or her regular bid
assignment from a modified limited duty assignment, what Complainant’s bid assignment
consisted of and where the bid assignment was located, and why the Agency didn’t allow
Complainant to return to his bid assignment. At the conclusion of the supplemental investigation,
Complainant requested a hearing.

AJ Decision

The AJ found that Complainant was bound by the September 9, 2008 settlement agreement to
remain in the A1 Sorter position, explaining that, “[t]he conditions of the settlement, which
contemplated the possibility that the Complainant could move into another position, were never
met.” Alternately, the AJ determined that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case for
retaliation or disability. The AJ relied on the evidence of record, and credible testimony from
Complainant, M2, and one of the Agency’s Labor Representatives who was initially consulted
about the matter when Complainant submitted his light duty requests.

The Agency issued its Final Order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove
discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.
                                                  5                                     2019004022

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), all post-hearing factual findings by an AJ will be upheld if
supported by substantial evidence in the record. Substantial evidence is defined as “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.” Universal
Camera Corp. v. National Labor Relations Board, 340 U.S. 474, 477 (1951) (citation omitted). A
finding regarding whether or not discriminatory intent existed is a factual finding. See Pullman-
Standard Co. v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 293 (1982). An AJ's conclusions of law are subject to a de
novo standard of review, whether or not a hearing was held.

An AJ’s credibility determination based on the demeanor of a witness or on the tone of voice of a
witness will be accepted unless documents or other objective evidence so contradicts the
testimony, or the testimony so lacks in credibility that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it.
See EEOC Management Directive 110, Chapter 9, at § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant’s Claim of AJ Error

The regulation set forth under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(e) provides that an AJ shall have the power
to regulate the conduct of a hearing. The Commission has long held that an AJ has full
responsibility for the adjudication of the complaint. EEO Management Directive 110 (“MD-110”)
(Aug. 5, 2015), Ch. 7 § III(D). This responsibility gives the AJ wide latitude in directing the terms,
conduct, or course of EEOC Administrative hearings. Douglas F. v. Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, EEOC Appeal No. 0120122183 (Dec. 4, 2015) citations omitted.

On appeal, Complainant, through his attorney, contends that the AJ caused “a devastating adverse
chilling effect on Complainant’s cross-examination of [M2] who was listed specifically as a cross-
examination witness for the Complainant” by denying his requests to treat M2 as a hostile witness,
and not allowing him to ask M2 leading questions.

The hearing transcript reveals that upon realizing that Complainant only called M2 as a witness
for cross examination, the AJ deemed M2 a “witness called by both parties.” Complainant could
ask leading questions when cross examining M2, but not when he expanded the line of questioning
to address matters not previously raised by the Agency. We find the AJ’s actions not only
procedurally appropriate, but beneficial to Complainant. Had Complainant been limited to cross-
examination, he would not have been permitted to expand his questioning to other matters relevant
to his case.

The hearing transcript further reveals that Complainant struggled to compose non-leading
questions throughout the hearing. The AJ provided Complainant with leeway on this matter, as
well as guidance on rephrasing his questions to obtain the information he sought. The AJ’s finding
that M2 was not a hostile witness is supported in the hearing record, which reflects that M2
provided complete and detailed responses to Complainant’s questions, where he knew the answers.
                                                 6                                      2019004022

During the hearing, the AJ suggested that in part, Complainant’s difficulties questioning M2
stemmed from his lack of preparation. We find that the AJ did not commit a reversable error with
respect to Complainant’s questioning of M2.

Settlement Agreement

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.504(a) provides that any settlement agreement knowingly and
voluntarily agreed to by the parties, reached at any stage of the complaint process, shall be binding
on both parties. The Commission has held that a settlement agreement constitutes a contract
between the employee and the Agency, to which ordinary rules of contract construction apply. See
Herrington v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Request No. 05960032 (Dec. 9, 1996). The Commission has
further held that it is the intent of the parties as expressed in the contract, not some unexpressed
intention that controls the contract’s construction. Eggleston v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, EEOC
Request No. 05900795 (Aug. 23, 1990). In ascertaining the intent of the parties with regard to the
terms of a settlement agreement, the Commission has generally relied on the plain meaning rule.
See Hyon O. v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05910787 (Dec. 2, 1991). This rule
states that if the writing appears to be plain and unambiguous on its face, its meaning must be
determined from the four corners of the instrument without resort to extrinsic evidence of any
nature. See Montgomery Elevator Co. v. Building Eng'g Servs. Co., 730 F.2d 377 (5th Cir. 1984);
Complainant v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120140143 (Feb. 20, 2014).

Applying the plain meaning rule, we find that the AJ properly determined that Complainant’s
obligations under the September 9, 2008 EEO Settlement Agreement were binding with respect to
the alleged discriminatory act in the instant complaint.

Term 4 of the settlement agreement provided Complainant with two options that would allow him
to change his job assignment. Either (1) his “physician changes his medical restrictions to impose
limitations preventing him from continuing to perform the duties of the [flat sorter] assignment,”
or (2) he “successfully bids into some other assignment.” Complainant testified that he did not
pursue the first option, but had met the criteria for the second option by successfully bidding for
his Level 5 Mail Handler Equipment Operator position in October 2008, and again in January 2009
after his initial requests were denied.

Complainant has not provided sufficient evidence that he was able to “successfully bid” on his bid
position to satisfy Term 4. On appeal, he misleadingly states that the Commission’s 2012 decision
“sets out light duty job requests and doctors notes contained in the file that established that
[Complainant] was otherwise qualified to perform the duties of the Hi-Lo driver position that he
bid on.” Our 2012 decision made no finding on whether or not Complainant made or was able to
make a “successful bid” on his position. Rather, we found that the record was not sufficiently
developed at the time to allow for such a determination.

The record, now appropriately developed, reveals that the duties of Complainant’s bid position
were outside the restrictions listed in his limited duty requests. M2 testified that no limited duty
assignment exists for a hi-lo driver to only drive on smooth surfaces.
                                                 7                                     2019004022

Complainant conceded the Agency’s point that even at the Metroplex P&DC, driving a hi-lo would
be bumpy because the floor was not flush with the dock, ramp, or truck beds, causing a one to
three inch high bump for hi-lo drivers to drive over throughout the day. M2 cited other aspects of
the position that were beyond Complainant’s medical restrictions, including heavy lifting,
pushing/pulling and, twisting his neck and body to look back when backing up the hi-lo. Also,
Complainant had not shown that the mail carrier duties of the position were within his restrictions.

On appeal, Complainant also argues that the AJ improperly interpreted the settlement agreement
as “signing away” his right to return to his bid position, pursuant to the Agency’s Employee and
Labor Relations Manual (“ELM”). Specifically, where a current employee “has partially overcome
a compensable disability, the [Agency] must make every effort toward assigning the employee to
limited duty consistent with the employee's medically defined work limitation tolerance… [in
doing so, the Agency] should minimize any adverse or disruptive impact on the employee.” ELM
546.14(2). Additionally, “… all reasonable efforts must be made to assign the employee to limited
duty within the employee's craft and to keep the hours of limited duty as close as possible to the
employee's regular schedule.” ELM 546.143(3). We find the alleged denial of restoration rights to
be a red herring. The settlement agreement, and by extension, the AJ’s reasoning, does not conflict
with ELM policies. In order to exercise his restoration rights under the ELM provisions,
Complainant must establish that his bid position is within his physical limitations. He was unable
to do so.

To the extent Complainant is alleging that M1 and M2 used the settlement agreement as pretext to
deny his light duty requests, thereby preventing him from obtaining “a successful bid into some
other assignment,” under Term 4, he must be able to demonstrate that he qualified for the
assignment. Based on testimony by both Complainant and M2, as well as the position description,
Complainant’s medical restrictions and limitations rendered him unqualified because they
prevented him from performing the duties of his bid position. Thus, he cannot establish that M1
and M2 prevented him from successfully bidding on his bid position.

Given that Complainant was bound by the settlement agreement, and ample evidence supports that
he was unable to successfully meet the condition under Term 4 to obtain his bid assignment, we
decline to apply a disparate treatment analysis as well. However, we note that the AJ, properly
found that even if the settlement agreement did not apply, Complainant would not be able to
establish a prima facie case for disability discrimination or reprisal.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s Final Decision adopting the AJ’s finding
that Complainant has not proven discrimination by the Agency as alleged.
                                                  8                                      2019004022

                            STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                                RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.
                                                   9                                      2019004022

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 24, 2020
Date
