              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Fareen M., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Chad R. Wolf,
                                       Acting Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                            (Immigration and Customs Enforcement),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019003647

                                Agency No. HS-CBP-00146-2018

                                           DECISION

On May 20, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
May 8, 2019 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Customs and Border
Protection Officer (CBPO), GS-1895-12, at the Agency’s Port of Entry in Los Angeles, California.
On December 5, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint in which she alleged that the Agency
subjected her to a hostile work environment in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

           1. On May 3, 2017, an Acting Supervisor CBPO (AS1) initiated a verbal altercation
              with Complainant;

           2. On September 10, 2017, a fellow CBPO yelled at Complainant;



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019003647

           3. On September 20, 2017, her supervisor, a Supervisory CBPO (S1), removed a
              package that Complainant had seized from the seizure room, had the package
              placed in an unsecured cabinet in AS1’s office, and later gave Complainant
              conflicting explanations as to why he had done so.

Complainant alleged an additional claim in the instant complaint, namely that the Agency did not
issue her a cash award in December 2016. The Agency dismissed this allegation for failure to
timely raise the matter with an EEO counselor and dismissed the entire complaint as untimely
filed. Complainant appealed and, in Beverlee C. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No.
0120181707 (Sept. 7, 2018), the Commission reversed the Agency’s dismissal of the formal
complaint as untimely filed. The Commission, however, affirmed the Agency’s dismissal of the
award claim as untimely raised with an EEO Counselor. The Commission remanded the above-
identified claims.

At the conclusion of the ensuing investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of
the investigative report (IR) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final agency decision, and in accordance
with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
her to reprisal as alleged.

Incident (1): Complainant alleged that on May 3, 2017, while AS1 was having a discussion with
one of her colleagues (CBPO1) concerning a number of matters that AS1 believed she did not
handle correctly, AS1 started screaming at her, calling her a “backstabber and a saboteur,” and
shouting, “everything was f@#$ed up” since her arrival. IR 28-31. AS1 averred that while he
was having a private conversation with CBPO1, he caught Complainant eavesdropping. He further
stated that he stopped the conversation immediately to return to his office, and that Complainant
had stalked him and had provoked him into the altercation. He characterized Complainant’s
behavior towards him as “disrespectful, contemptuous, unprofessional, and vindictive” and denied
that he made the statements that Complainant had attributed to him. IR 197-211, 221-35.

Incident (2): Complainant alleged that another Customs and Border Protection Officer (CBPO2)
yelled at her in front of S1 regarding some delivery procedure changes that she was unaware of,
that S1 had intentionally failed to let her know about those changes, and that S1 did nothing about
CBPO2’s behavior toward her. IR 31-32. S1 stated that CBPO2 approached him and asked why
Complainant had not completed some paperwork that Complainant had been processing the
previous day. CBPO2 affirmed that the incident took place in October not September, that when
Complainant had left the paperwork unfinished when she clocked off the night before, that he
placed the paperwork on her tray before he left, and that Complainant started arguing with him
about it the next day. IR 183-84, 243-44.

Incident (3): Complainant alleged that she had detained and tested a piece of cargo for the presence
of drugs, that the test results came back positive, and that she placed the package with the test
sample into the seizure room which was a secured facility.
                                                  3                                     2019003647

She admitted that she failed to properly log the package in, and that it was an oversight on her part.
Complainant further averred that she found the package missing several days later and when she
reported the missing package to S1, he told her that he had given it to AS1 to store in the metal
filing cabinet in his office. She also stated that when she pressed S1 about the security of AS1’s
office, he informed her that it was secure. IR 32-34, 36. S1 and AS1 averred that Complainant
had placed the package in the wrong storage facility, that Complainant failed to log the package
into the seizure logbook, and that after S1 had told her about the whereabouts of the package, she
went into AS1’s office without his permission and rummaged around looking for it. S1 also
averred that while Complainant was not disciplined for the incident, he was. IR 184-87, 211-13.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Hostile Work Environment

To establish a claim of harassment Complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on his
statutorily protected classes; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further,
the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

The antidiscrimination statutes are not civility codes. Rather, they forbid “only behavior so
objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim's employment.” Oncale v. Sundowner
Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998). Therefore, to prove her harassment claim,
Complainant must establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so
pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's position would have found the conduct to
be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was taken because of her
protected classes. Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements, hostility and motive,
will the question of Agency liability present itself.
                                                 4                                      2019003647

Here, Complainant asserted that based on prior protected EEO activity, management officials
subjected her to a hostile work environment. Complainant alleged several incidents of what she
believed to be discriminatory and retaliatory harassment as described above. The Commission
finds that the totality of the conduct at issue was insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a
hostile work environment. See Annalee D. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120180162
(Dec. 28, 2017) (routine work assignments, instructions, and admonishments generally do not rise
to the level of harassment because they are common workplace occurrences); Mikki P. v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120182183 (Feb. 19, 2020) (unless conduct complained of
is pervasive and severe, a single incident or group of isolated incidents generally not considered
harassment).

Even assuming that the alleged conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to create a hostile
work environment, there is no persuasive evidence in the record that retaliatory animus played a
role in any of the actions of S1 or AS1. The record reflects that the alleged incidents were more
likely the result of routine supervision, managerial discipline, and general workplace disputes and
tribulations. The incidents all involved disputes over routine matters such as office procedures,
paperwork processing, and security surrounding seized items. When asked by the EEO
investigator why she believed these incidents to be retaliatory, Complainant responded that after
she had successfully prosecuted her prior EEO complaint, the officers around her created a hostile
environment and that their actions were further proof of discrimination against Latinas. When
asked whether she had any specific evidence that her prior EEO activity was a factor in any of the
above-referenced incidents, she replied that she did not understand what specific evidence was
being requested. IR 36-37. Beyond these generalized assertions, Complainant has presented
neither affidavits, declarations, or unsworn statements from witnesses other than herself nor
documents which contradict or undercut the explanations provided by S1 or AS1 for their actions
or which cause us to question their veracity as witnesses. In particular, Complainant did not
present any evidence contradicting the declarations of S1 and AS1 that neither of them was aware
of her prior EEO complaint. IR 181, 196. We therefore find that Complainant has not presented
enough evidence to establish that either of these officials were motivated by unlawful
considerations of Complainant’s previous EEO activity in connection with any of the incidents
listed and described in his complaint. As a result, the Commission finds that Complainant was not
subjected to reprisal or a retaliatory hostile work environment as alleged.

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision.
                                                  5                                      2019003647

                            STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                                RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.
                                                   6                                      2019003647

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 14, 2020
Date
