              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Ervin A., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Dr. Mark T. Esper,
                                           Secretary,
                                     Department of Defense
                                   (Defense Security Service),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002009

                                    Agency No. DSS-18-002

                                           DECISION

On December 20, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 27, 2018, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment and discrimination based on his sex and
in reprisal.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Industrial Security
Specialist, at the Agency’s field office in Cypress, California.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019002009

On January 10, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected him
to a hostile work environment and discriminated against him on the basis of sex (male) and in
reprisal 2 when:

       1.      from October 1, 2017 through October 15, 2017, Complainant was suspended for
               failure to perform;

       2.      since March 2016, he was denied opportunities to serve on Industrial Security
               Representative (ISR) teams, and denied the same opportunities as two female
               employees, who are receiving preferential treatment;

       3.      from 2012 to present, Complainant requested from his leadership to be allowed to
               telework and perform regular duties from the Pasadena Field Office, but was denied
               and reassigned duties at the Cypress Field Office location; and,

       4.      from January 2012 to present, Complainant notified management of interference
               and unknown access of his government issued laptop.

On February 2, 2018, the Agency issued a partial acceptance and dismissal. The Agency dismissed
claim 4 pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(4) in that this matter was previously raised before and
decided by the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB); it was not filed as a mixed case complaint
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.302, and a court of competent jurisdiction decided the case pursuant
to a Petition for Review of MSPB No. SF0432100852-I-1 on the same facts.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

Complainant was removed from his previous position as an Industrial Security Specialist for the
Pasadena, California office effective July 12, 2010. He was removed for unacceptable
performance. Complainant appealed to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) on July 19,
2010 and claimed sex discrimination. Complainant noted that his computer was constantly getting
tampered with causing him performance issues. A decision was rendered to return Complainant to
his position with back pay. The MSPB decision stated Complainant failed to support his sex
discrimination defense and computer tampering claims, but that the reinstatement decision
afforded him all available relief anyway. Complainant was reinstated to the Cypress Field Office.

From 2012 to present, Complainant asserted that he had requested from management (his first-
and second-line supervisors) to be allowed to work and perform regular duties from the Pasadena
Field Office. However, Complainant asserted that he was denied this request, and reassigned duties
at the Cypress Field Office location instead.



2
 For his previous 2010 Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) complaint, and subsequent 2012
MSPB appeal.
                                                3                                    2019002009

He noted that the allegation wasn’t that he was prevented from teleworking 3, just from regularly
working out of the Pasadena office. Complainant asserted that he was being discriminated against
and subjected to unfair treatment and continuing harassment on the bases of sex and reprisal for
his previous MSPB complaint. Complainant stated that two female employees (CW1 and CW2)
were allowed to work out of either office whenever it was convenient for them. Complainant
testified that another employee, CW3 (male) was reassigned from the San Diego office to the
Pasadena office.

Complainant’s first line supervisor was the Los Angeles Field Office Chief (S1) (male). S1 stated
that following the reassignment, Complainant had never requested to perform regular duties from
the Pasadena office. S1 noted that after his transfer to the Cypress office, Complainant requested
to work from the Pasadena office once, after a meeting was held there. S1 noted that he had
approved of Complainant’s request. S1 asserted that he is not aware of Complainant requesting a
permanent reassignment from the Cypress office to the Pasadena office. S1 testified that CW3
applied to vacancy announcement number DSS-18-10181152-P, after having served a detail in the
Pasadena office, and was selected for the Pasadena office. S1 noted that Complainant had the same
opportunity to apply if he wanted to. Complainant’s second line supervisor was the Western
Region Director (S2) (male). S2 noted that he encouraged Complainant to apply for the Pasadena
position that CW3 applied for, but Complainant chose not to. Complainant acknowledged S2’s
suggestion but stated that he did not apply for it “because [he] would have validated them not
moving me.”

Since March 2016, Complainant asserted that he was denied opportunities to serve on Industrial
Security Representative (ISR) teams based on his sex and in reprisal. Complainant asserted that he
was clearly denied the same opportunities as two female employees, CW1 and CW2, who he
alleged received preferential treatment. S1 stated that CW1 and CW2 both performed at
satisfactory levels, and therefore could serve. S1 testified that due to Complainant’s declining
performance, he had reduced Complainant’s workload on ISRs. He noted that Complainant never
complained to him about this reduction.

S1 testified that due to Complainant’s declining work performance, Complainant was placed on
an Opportunity to Improve Period (OTIP) on May 2, 2016. After failing to successfully perform
during the OTIP, Complainant was issued a Notice of Proposed Fourteen Day Suspension, dated
July 21, 2017. The Notice provided specific examples of deficiencies. The Notice also specified
that despite having over a year to improve his work, Complainant still failed to improve to
acceptable standards.

Complainant was suspended from October 1 – 15, 2017, based on his failure to improve during
the OTIP. The proposing official for Complainant’s suspension was the Chief of Human Capital
Management Office (female). The deciding official for Complainant’s suspension was the Director
of Industrial Security Field Operations (male).


3
 Since Complainant acknowledged that the claim was not regarding teleworking approval, we will
not address the teleworking portion of the claim further.
                                                 4                                      2019002009

The Director stated that he was provided paperwork with Complainant’s poor performance dating
back to FY2015 as well as Complainant’s unsuccessful performance ratings. Based on the
information provided, Complainant was suspended for poor performance. Complainant believed
the suspension was retaliation for his successful 2010 MSPB complaint.

S1 noted that Complainant has a history of saying his computer has been tampered with to justify
his work containing errors. He stated that the IT department did a formal investigation on
Complainant’s computer to ensure no one was tampering with Complainant’s system. S1 stated
that he even had Complainant submit paper copies of his reports to help mitigate computer
tampering concerns. S1 noted that the hard copy reports would contain the same errors.
Complainant disagreed and argued that his laptop was in fact tampered with.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The November 27, 2018 Final Agency Decision (FAD) affirmed the Agency’s prior procedural
dismissal of claim 4, in part. However, it determined that the Agency’s prior procedural dismissal
of claim 4 based on reprisal was inappropriate. The Agency stated that it was undisputed that
Complainant made a prior complaint of discrimination which he pursued with the MSPB, and that
the Agency was aware of this proceeding. The Agency noted that what Complainant was asserting
in claim 4, was that his participation in the MSPB proceeding resulted in retaliation against him.
The Agency determined that the procedural dismissal was erroneously based on the concept that
because Complainant won his MSPB proceeding on other grounds, not on discrimination claims,
that he could not pursue a retaliation claim. The Agency further noted that because the factual
underpinnings of this complaint are identical to Complainant’s claim of sex discrimination and
reprisal discrimination, the report of investigation was sufficient for both bases to be addressed in
the November 27, 2018 FAD. The Agency ultimately concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant argued that the procedural dismissal of claim 4 was inappropriate. Specifically, that
the claim was different from the MSPB claim, noting that the MSPB did not consider evidence
because MSPB had determined it was moot. Regarding the reprisal portion of claim 4,
Complainant asserted that it was erroneously decided because it was clear that the Agency was
treating him differently based on his sex and in reprisal, and that a finding should have been made
in his favor. Regarding his other claims, Complainant asserted that he was clearly subjected to
disparate treatment based on his sex, and that a finding should be made in his favor.

The Agency did not provide an appellate brief.
                                                 5                                      2019002009

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-
110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of
the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony
of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Disparate Treatment

Complainant alleges that he was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567
(1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for its actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade
the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited
reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the factual inquiry
can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of
whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s actions were
motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714
(1983).

Unlawful Harassment

Complainant also alleged that he was subjected to unlawful harassment. A harassment claim is
examined under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).
See also Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems. Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002
(Mar. 8, 1994). To establish this claim, a complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a
statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on his
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
                                                   6                                       2019002009

had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability.

The Supreme Court in Harris explained that an “objectively hostile or abusive work environment
[is created when] a reasonable person would find [it] hostile or abusive” and the complainant
subjectively perceives it as such. Harris, 510 U.S. at 21-22. Whether the harassment is sufficiently
severe to trigger a violation must be determined by looking at all the circumstances, including “the
frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or
humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an
employee's work performance.” Id. at 23.

A hostile work environment exists when the workplace is permeated with discriminatory
intimidation, ridicule, and insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the condition of the
complainant's employment. See Harris, supra; see also Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs.,
Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 78 (1998).

With respect to element (5) of a harassment claim, an agency is subject to vicarious liability for
harassment when it is created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority
over the employee. See Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998); Faragher v.
City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998); Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful
Harassment by Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999).

Disparate Treatment

With respect to Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, assuming arguendo, that Complainant
established a prima facie case of discrimination, the Agency has articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. The record demonstrated that Complainant had a record
of declining performances. Complainant was informed of this both informally and formally. When
Complainant’s performance did not improve, he was placed on an OTIP in May 2016. After over
a year of being on the OTIP, Complainant’s performance still did not improve to acceptable
standards and he was subsequently suspended for two weeks in October 2017. The record further
demonstrated that Complainant was not denied the opportunity to serve on the ISR teams because
of his sex or in reprisal, but because of his performance records. Additionally, Complainant argued
that he was treated differently from CW1 and CW2 who were allowed to work from the Pasadena
office whenever they chose. In this regard, S1 explained that when Complainant had asked to work
from Pasadena on occasion, he allowed it, but noted that he had to apply for any type of permanent
reassignment position. The record also demonstrated that despite encouragement from S2 to apply
for a Pasadena position, Complainant chose not to. While Complainant argues that the position
was unfairly given to CW3, he also acknowledged that he was encouraged to apply, but chose not
to.
                                                7                                     2019002009

Regarding claim 4, we acknowledge the Agency’s decision in its November 27, 2018 FAD to
reverse its previous decision to procedurally dismiss claim 4 in its entirety. While the computer
tampering portion of claim 4 was previously addressed in Complainant’s MSPB proceeding,
Complainant’s claim was one of continued tampering. Therefore, it exists as a new and continuing
claim that continued after the MSPB proceedings. In this matter, even though the Agency
dismissed the portion of claim 4 regarding computer tampering, the record still contained
information to address the tampering allegations. The record demonstrated that following
Complainant’s allegations of computer tampering, the Agency’s internal Information Technology
department investigated and determined that there was no evidence to support Complainant’s
allegations. Complainant has failed to demonstrate that the Agency’s internal findings were
influenced by discriminatory animus and that his computer was tampered with based on his
protected class or in retialiation.

We note that agencies generally have broad discretion to carry out personnel decisions and exercise
business judgment. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996).
Regarding adverse actions, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions for which Complainant has failed to show were pretext for discrimination. Pretext inquiry
is not concerned with bad judgment, impeccability, dislike, or a mistake. Marvin W. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120170438 (Dec. 12, 2018). The question is not whether the
agency made the best, or even a sound, business decision; it is whether the real reason is
discrimination. Mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is a pretext for
intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief, however genuine, does not
constitute evidence of pretext. The focus of pretext inquiry is whether an agency’s actions were
motivated by discriminatory animus. Further, at all times the ultimate burden of persuasion
remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency was
motivated by prohibited discrimination. Complainant has failed in this regard.

Hostile Work Environment

Complainant alleged that he was subjected to a hostile work environment based on his sex and in
reprisal. As an initial matter, Complainant has established parts 1 and 2 of a prima facie case of
harassment. To establish part 3 of his prima facie case of harassment, Complainant argued that he
was treated differently based on his protected class and in retaliation for his 2010/2012 MSPB
proceedings. Here, Complainant asserted that he was subjected to unfair criticism of his work,
suspension because of a perceived lack of performance, denial of ability to work out of the
Pasadena office at his choosing, and denial of ISR opportunities. However, based on what
Complainant has provided, we find that he has not established part 3 of his prima facie case.

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant did establish part 3, we turn to part 4 of the prima face case
of harassment. Complainant argued that management’s actions created a hostile work environment
for him. However, analyzing the record as a whole, we find that the record demonstrates that the
incidents do not demonstrate that Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment, or
discrimination. In sum, the evidence does not support a finding of discrimination on any basis, the
presence of discriminatory animus, or the existence of a hostile work environment.
                                                 8                                     2019002009

The Commission notes that a finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our
determination that Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency
were motivated by discriminatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:
       1.   The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
             law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other
party. Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   9                                      2019002009

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).



FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 19, 2020
Date
