              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Nita H., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                          Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                         (Pacific Area),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002363

                                 Hearing No. 480-2017-00312X

                                   Agency No. 4F913002616


                                           DECISION

On January 7, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 10, 2018, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the Agency, in its Final Agency Decision (FAD), correctly determined that Complainant
was not subjected to discriminatory harassment based on race, and sex when:

    1. On December 1, 3-5, 28-31, 2015, and January 2 and 4, 2016, Complainant was charged
       Absent Without Official Leave (AWOL) rather than the sick leave that she requested;




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                4                                    2019002363

to leaving, which C1 and C2 took to their doctors. PM1 asserted that C1 and C2 filled out the
forms and brought them back to be submitted to the Department of Labor (DOL) for approval, in
compliance with the applicable rules, regulations, and instructions.

PM2 explained that on January 4, 2016, Complainant was late by .13 hours and was charged
AWOL. She asserted that after Complainant notified her why Complainant was late and submitted
a PS Form 3971 indicating her absence was FMLA, Complainant’s leave was adjusted to FMLA
Leave Without Pay (LWOP).

MPOO stated that Complainant did contact him to request a meeting because she was upset about
how her attendance was being handled by PM1. MPOO stated that he met with Complainant, and
that she told him that she should not be charged AWOL and was entitled to FMLA protection.
MPOO asserted that at the end of the meeting, Complainant also told him that she was married to
PM1. MPOO stated that he spoke with PM1 who informed him that Complainant was not entitled
to FMLA because PM1 had requested documentation from her which Complainant would not
provide.

MPOO asserted that a fact-finding investigation was needed to resolve whether Complainant was
entitled to FMLA or sick leave, but no such investigation occurred at that time because of
Complainant's attendance and the issues created by PM1 being married to her. MPOO stated that
following the meeting, he began the process of identifying a replacement for PM1 because of the
marriage, which culminated in PM1’s removal in early January 2016. MPOO stated that he also
placed S1 at the California City Post Office to ensure that Complainant would be treated fairly. 3

The record reflects that all of Complainant’s AWOL charges were later changed to FMLA Sick
Leave, Annual Leave, or LWOP following a grievance settlement.

Claims 2 and 3

Complainant alleged that PM1 called her into his office and stated that since Complainant did not
want to be with him, he would make her life at work a “living hell.” Complainant added that PM1
also threatened her, indicating that he was an excellent marksman; that he did not need to be near
Complainant to hit her; and that he could hit Complainant from 800 yards away. Complainant
asserted that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassing comments. She stated that she was
surprised and scared, that she started shaking and crying, and that she asked to leave the office.

Complainant asserted that she called MPOO to schedule a meeting to discuss the issues she was
having and the threats at work. Complainant stated that she reported the harassment to MPOO
during a meeting on December 9, 2015. Complainant asserted that management took no action on


3
 The record includes statements made by PM1 explaining that he had a personal relationship with
Complainant, as he was married to her on January 18, 2015. The statements indicate that PM1
began the annulment process in December 2015, and the marriage was annulled on August 31,
2016.
                                                 2                                     2019002363


    2. On or about December 8, 2015, the Postmaster (PM1) threatened Complainant when he
       stated, "I am an excellent marksman. I do not need to be right near you to hit you, I can do
       it from 800 yards away;"

    3. On December 9, 2015, Complainant reported the alleged harassment to the Manager, Post
       Office Operations (MPOO) but appropriate action was not taken;

    4. On an unspecified date, PM1 told Complainant that if she did not want to have sex with
       him, then he would reduce her hours and lower her pay from Level 7 to Level 6; and

    5. On January 4, 2016, PM1 stood behind Complainant and verbally harassed her while she
       worked at the retail counter.

Whether the Agency correctly determined that Complainant was not subjected to discriminatory
harassment based on pregnancy and retaliation (instant complaint) when:

    6. On March 15, 2016, Complainant’s scheduled hours were reduced;

    7. On March 28, 2016, Complainant’s request to take her lunch break at a specified time was
       denied;

    8. From March 15, 2016, through April 14, 2016, Complainant was not permitted to take
       bathroom breaks as needed; and

    9. On April 20, 2016, the Officer-in-Charge (OIC) placed Complainant in AWOL status and
       notified Complainant to report for a fact-finding investigation. 2

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a part-time Sales,
Services/Distribution Associate, PS-06 at the Agency’s Mojave Post Office in California City,
California. On April 6, 2016, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (African-American), sex (female), and reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as set forth above.

Complainant asserted that the instant complaint is the basis for her claim of retaliation. She first
initiated EEO contact on December 16, 2015. Complainant had also previously initiated another
EEO complaint on February 10, 2014. That complaint had been closed about two months later.



2
  The Agency noted that Complainant withdrew Claims 10 to 13 regarding issuance of requests
for medical documentation; a scheduled fact-finding interview; placement on AWOL status; and
denial of a request for reassignment to the Nevada/Sierra District.
                                               3                                    2019002363

The management officials named in the instant complaint were either aware of Complainant's prior
EEO activity or the instant complaint.

Claims 1-5: Discriminatory Harassment – Race and Sex

Claim 1

Complainant asserted that she requested sick leave or Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
leave on several dates in December 2015, and two dates in January 2016. She alleged that PM1
charged her with AWOL rather than granting her sick leave on those dates. Complainant stated
that her first line supervisor (S1) told her that S1 was instructed by PM1 to mark Complainant
AWOL.

Complainant asserted that on December 1, 2015, she requested to go home "ill" and management
later requested "acceptable documentation" for her absences. Complainant explained that her
Postal Service (PS) Form 3971, on which she requested leave, was returned to her by PM1 as
disapproved with the comment "provide medical stating can't do any part of job" and that the form
was marked AWOL.

Complainant stated her disagreement with management's reason for denying her leave, asserting
that she had given PM1 documentation and also requested FMLA paperwork which would have
provided her with protection and 15 days to submit more documentation. Complainant stated that
it was inappropriate to place her on AWOL status because she was not given 15 days to turn in
proper FMLA documents. Complainant asserted that she was not given a reason for being placed
in AWOL status for the remaining dates.

Complainant asserted that a Caucasian male coworker (C1) was treated more favorably because
C1 was injured at work in October 2015; and PM1 gave C1 forms for FMLA/sick leave.
Complainant stated that C2, another Caucasian male was also treated more favorably because C2
had surgery in July 2015 and PM1 gave C2 forms for FMLA/sick leave. She asserted that PM1
also placed C2 on the schedule as “FMLA.”

PM1 explained that Complainant did not request FMLA leave until she returned to work on
December 4, 2015, and that he provided her with the FMLA documentation on that date. PM1
stated that prior to the alleged incident, Complainant was instructed to provide medical
documentation for her absences stating that she was unable to perform her duties. PM1 asserted
that when Complainant returned to work, she failed to provide the documentation as instructed,
and that Complainant had no documentation to support her request for FMLA. Therefore, sick
leave was not granted.

PM1 stated that Complainant was informed of the possibility of being marked AWOL if she failed
to provide the required documentation upon returning to work. He asserted that Complainant was
charged AWOL because she failed to provide the required medical documentation to substantiate
her absence. PM1 explained that both C1 and C2 had on-the-job injuries and requested forms prior
                                                 5                                     2019002363

her report, and that immediately afterwards, PM1 increased his harassment of her in retaliation for
reporting him to MPOO.

PM1 asserted that the alleged incident never occurred. He stated that Complainant never told him
that his or anyone else's actions constituted harassment or a hostile work environment for her.

MPOO stated that he was not aware of the allegation that PM1 threatened Complainant until
Complainant wrote a letter to the District Human Resources Manager in March 2016. MPOO
asserted that at no time during the meeting he had held with Complainant did she tell him that she
had been threatened, harassed, or discriminated against, nor did she ask him to remove PM1.

Record evidence includes notes from MPOO’s interview with Complainant. The notes indicated
that Complainant's complaints related to leave requests and requests for support documentation
for her leave. The notes indicated that complainant requested: 1) to do her job with no “bitter”
remarks or actions from PM1; 2) her absences be fixed; and 3) no interference with her transfers
– no bad marks on her record.

The record evidence includes a Postal Inspection Service Investigation Report dated April 18,
2016, indicating that the investigation was initiated following a statement made by Complainant
dated March 25, 2016, alleging that PM1 threatened her on or about December 8, 2015, and on
January 4, 2016. The investigation included interviews of Complainant, PM1, a City Carrier, and
S1. The results of the investigation reflect that PM1 denied threatening Complainant; stated that
Complainant had been seeking a transfer to Nevada; and that PM1 had been told that Complainant
was attempting to blackmail him.

Claim 4

Complainant alleged that PM1 took her behind closed doors and again told her that since
Complainant did not want to have sex with him or be with him, PM1 would take away
Complainant’s Level 7 position and reduce her hours. Complainant stated that she began crying,
and that she told PM1 to leave her alone and allow her to do her work. Complainant asserted that
she reported this incident to an official in Labor Relations (LR1) on April 1, 2016, and that she
mailed a letter to three management officials, including MPOO, on March 25, 2016.

PM1 asserted that the alleged incident never occurred. He stated that he was unaware of
Complainant bringing the alleged concerns to the attention of any other management official. PM1
asserted that Complainant was a Part Time Flexible (PTF) and, by the very nature of the position,
the hours fluctuate. PM1 explained that Complainant's pay level was always a Level 6, and that
she was utilized as a lead clerk (receiving Level 7 pay) when he did not have a manager to oversee
one of the two stations he was responsible for.

PM1 explained that he oversaw the Mojave Post Office while the lead clerk was used to close out
and assist at California City. PM1 asserted that Complainant served as the lead clerk until she told
him that she no longer wanted that responsibility. PM1 stated that he then used another employee,
                                                 6                                     2019002363

C2, to serve as lead clerk until a manager was detailed into the office. PM1 asserted that once a
manager was detailed to the office, there no longer was a need for a lead clerk with higher-level
pay. PM1 asserted that Complainant's higher-level detail came to an end because she requested
not to serve as the lead clerk.

MPOO stated that he has no personal knowledge or information regarding this allegation which,
he asserted was never reported to him.

Record evidence includes a USPS Office of Inspector General Report dated April 19, 2016,
indicating that an investigation was initiated to determine if PM1 had changed Complainant's time
and attendance. The investigation revealed that Complainant and PM1 began a romantic
relationship in November 2014, which PM1 did not report to management until December 2015,
when Complainant raised the allegations against him. The report reflected that PM1 may have
paid Complainant administrative leave in September and October 2015 that was not earned, and
that PM1 altered Complainant’s time and attendance to her benefit.

Claim 5

Complainant alleged that PM1 harassed her off and on. She stated that PM1 would stand behind
her at the retail counter and make derogatory statements, follow her around the office, yell at her,
and tell her to follow his instructions. Complainant stated that PM1 told her to stop laughing, that
she was not going to do what she wanted to do, that when this is all over Complainant and PM1
will see who prevails, and that she is nothing but trouble.

Complainant asserted that PM1 made the comments in front of S1. She stated that PM1 also denied
her a break, and that he stood behind her and made more unprofessional statements. Complainant
stated that she suffered an anxiety attack, that she started crying, and that she left the workroom
floor. Complainant asserted that she called MPOO and asked him to tell PM1 to leave the office
because she thought MPOO had told her that PM1 was not to come around her work location as a
temporary solution to the ongoing issue. Complainant stated that S1 and a female coworker (C3)
witnessed this incident.

PM1 asserted that the alleged incident never occurred. He stated that he was not aware of
Complainant having an anxiety attack or any other evidence of being upset in the workplace. S1
provided supporting testimony, asserting that Complainant's allegations that PM1 made derogatory
comments to her and stood behind her at the retail counter were not true. S1 stated that PM1 told
Complainant only to please get back to work, and to please just do her job.

S1 also stated that Complainant's allegations that PM1 followed her around the office and yelled
at her were not true. He explained that he and PM1 were standing overlooking the window section,
leaning against the wall. S1 stated that Complainant did not make him aware that she was having
an anxiety attack or crying. He asserted that he had no knowledge of Complainant's agreement
with the MPOO.
                                                7                                    2019002363

MPOO asserted that there was no agreement with Complainant that PM1 would not be around her
work location. He explained that he took action to replace PM1 temporarily because
Complainant's attendance issues needed to be addressed, and because Complainant and PM1 were
married. MPOO asserted that Complainant never reported alleged harassment to him, reiterating
that she did send a letter to the District Human Resources Manager in March 2016 alleging
harassment.

The record includes a statement by C3 dated April 7, 2016, indicating that while Complainant was
on duty at the counter at the California City Post Office, she noticed PM1 standing behind
Complainant. The statement provides that C3 indicated to Complainant that PM1 was behind her,
and that Complainant appeared startled and became upset. C3 asserted that she did not hear PM1
make any statements to Complainant.

Claims 6-9: Discriminatory Harassment - Pregnancy and Retaliation (Instant Complaint)

Claim 6

Complainant alleged that her normal work schedule was 40 hours per week but when she returned
to work on March 15, 2016, another Postmaster (PM2) scheduled her for 25 to 31 hours per week
from March 17, 2016, through April 15, 2016. Complainant asserted that she lost up to 30 to 35
hours. Complainant alleged that PM1 was involved in this claim because PM1 left pre-made
schedules for PM2 before he was moved to another location. Complainant stated that initially, she
was not told why her hours were being reduced. Complainant stated that during her time at the
Mojave/California City Post Office, she had been scheduled for 38 to 40 hours per week but after
her EEO complaints were filed, her schedule began to change.

Complainant asserted that C2 was treated more favorably because PM2 increased C2’s hours while
reducing Complainant’s hours. Complainant stated that C4, a female coworker, was treated more
favorably because C4 was allowed to work only 34.5 hours a week due to an injury but was
working 40 hours during the timeframe that Complainant's hours were reduced.

PM2 explained that when she assumed duties as the OIC at the Mojave Post Office, she reviewed
and adjusted all clerk and carrier hours to make the office more efficient. PM2 asserted that she
made the schedules for clerks and carriers for both the Mojave Post Office and the California City
Branch. She stated that she discussed with Complainant that Complainant was not able to perform
the early morning duties of throwing parcels due to lifting restrictions because Complainant had
submitted a work limitation of no lifting over 20 pounds. PM2 stated that she offered Complainant
a light-duty request packet, which Complainant stated she did not need at that time.

PM2 explained that C3 worked the morning hours in California City throwing parcels whereas
Complainant had weight restrictions and could not throw parcels weighing more than 20 pounds.
PM2 asserted that the window hours that Complainant worked were what was available within her
restrictions. PM2 stated that C4, an African-American like Complainant, was covering the
window for both Mojave and California City Post Offices whereas Complainant was unwilling to
                                                 8                                     2019002363

work at the Mojave Post Office, which affected Complainant's hours. PM2 stated that she
scheduled Complainant to work at Mojave on Saturdays to even out her hours with that of C4, but
Complainant refused. PM2 asserted that, had Complainant been willing to work at the Mojave
Post Office in addition to the California City Post Office, Complainant would have had more hours.

MPOO affirmed that Complainant does not work fulltime, and she has no guarantee of hours. S1
provided supporting testimony, explaining that Complainant’s hours may have been cut as part of
the scheduling process, and that all employees were affected by hour cuts when Complainant
returned to work. He also asserted that Complainant did not come to him to object to her scheduled
hours. The management officials all asserted that Complainant’s protected classes were not factors
in her reduced hours. 4

The record also includes a form WH-380E for requesting FMLA leave signed and dated by
Complainant's healthcare provider on July 19, 2016, indicating that Complainant is unable to lift,
pull, push over 15 lbs. and unable to stand for long periods of time. Also included is the same
form signed by Complainant's healthcare provider on April 19, 2016, in which Complainant was
diagnosed with Bipolar II Disorder, Severe Depression, Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder, unrelated to her pregnancy, and which indicates that Complainant is
unable to perform any work-related duties.

Claim 7

Complainant alleged that she asked S1 if she could take a lunch break later in the day before the
other clerk left for the day because it would be an extended time before her last break. Complainant
stated that S1 denied her request. Complainant asserted that S1 told her that he was following
what PM2 instructed him to do, which was to inform Complainant that there was no one to cover
for her late lunches. Complainant asserted that she disagreed with management's reasons for
denying her late lunches because PM2 had changed her schedule so that Complainant was working
later in the day when all the clerks had left for the day. Complainant stated that her previous
schedule allowed for coverage, and that her FMLA documentation provided for breaks as needed.

Complainant stated that C2 was treated more favorably because C2 was allowed to take a lunch
break four to six hours into his shift. She asserted that C4 also was treated more favorably because
C4 was allowed to take a lunch break three to five and one-half hours into her shift while
Complainant had to take lunch one to one and one-half hours into her shift. Complainant argued
that male employees were treated more favorably with respect to leave requests, specifically noting
that males requesting sick leave were approved from the beginning. Complainant also asserted
that PM2 told her that PM2 did not have anyone to cover Complainant’s "pregnancy breaks" or
"later in the day lunches."


4
  The investigator stated that a review of Complainant’s Time and Attendance reports did not
indicate that there was a drop in Complainant's hours. The investigator also stated that when
Complainant's hours were lower, it was due to leave that Complainant took.
                                                9                                     2019002363


PM2 explained that C2 processed mail for about 90% of his shift while Complainant worked the
counter with the public most of her shift. She asserted that Complainant's ability to take a break
was based on the availability of help. PM2 asserted that C4 took her lunch break between offices
because she worked at both Mojave and California City Post Offices. She explained that C4 would
cover lunch and breaks at California City and then take her break and travel to Mojave to close at
the end of the day.

PM2 asserted that Complainant did take a lunch break on March 28, 2016, from 12:50 to 13:02.
She stated that Complainant's schedule usually was for six hours or less, which did not qualify for
a lunch break. PM2 asserted that if Complainant did work more than six hours, her lunch break
was somewhere between noon and 1:30 p.m. PM2 asserted that Complainant was not denied a
lunch break when she worked more than six hours. PM2 recalled that Complainant stated only
that she did not want to take an early office break. PM2 asserted that Complainant's protected
classes were not factors.

Claim 8

Complainant alleged that she was denied bathroom breaks as needed every day over a one-month
period due to no coverage. Complainant asserted that PM2 made the schedule so that no clerks
were available to cover for Complainant. Complainant explained that she would ask S1 daily to
use the restroom because of her health condition, which he denied, stating he was following the
guidance of PM2.

Complainant asserted that there was no policy on bathroom breaks but the front window could not
be left unattended due to safety reasons. Complainant stated that management told her to try to
follow the schedule, which meant using the bathroom when there was more than one clerk at the
window. Complainant stated that she disagreed with management's reasons for denying her
requests because the prior schedules that had full coverage for bathroom breaks could have been
used. Complainant did not identify any comparators with respect to bathroom breaks.

PM2 explained that she discussed bathroom breaks with Complainant and told her to go as needed
and to notify S1 when she needed to leave the window so he could assist customers while
Complainant was gone. PM2 stated that Complainant was not denied bathroom breaks and was
entitled to "as needed" bathroom breaks. She asserted that Complainant never objected to
management's handling of her "as needed" bathroom breaks. S1 provided supporting testimony,
explaining that when a clerk needs a break, he fills in until the clerk returns. He stated that
Complainant never was denied a bathroom break while he was in the office. Both management
officials asserted that Complainant’s protected classes were not factors.

Claim 9

Complainant alleged that PM2 told her that as of April 20, 2016, PM2 was placing Complainant
in an AWOL status for failure to call Human Resources (HR) or S1. Complainant asserted that
                                                10                                     2019002363

she received a letter on April 30, 2016, signed by PM2 informing her that Complainant had been
placed in an AWOL status and to report for a fact-finding investigation because Complainant had
not called in nor had she provided supporting documentation for her absence.

Complainant asserted that she disagreed with the reasons for being placed on AWOL and being
notified to report for a fact-finding investigation because she had informed HR and S1 of her
absence. Complainant stated that management did not communicate with one another before
taking the alleged action. Complainant asserted that it was inappropriate for her to have been told
to report for a fact-finding investigation because she had again requested FMLA protection for her
new health condition, and that she was not granted 15 days to provide medical documentation.
Complainant did not identify any comparators for this claim.

PM2 explained that Complainant did not call or provide documentation stating she was going to
be out of work. PM2 stated that because she had not heard from Complainant, she sent a letter
informing Complainant that Complainant was in AWOL status since April 20, 2016 and directing
Complainant to report for a fact-finding investigation. PM2 asserted that the fact-finding did not
occur because Complainant provided an explanation and medical documentation on April 29,
2016. PM2 asserted that Complainant's protected classes were not factors. Record evidence
reflects that PM2’s action in sending Complainant the letter was consistent with applicable sections
of the Employee Labor Relations Manual (ELM).

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but
subsequently withdrew her request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Therein, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

The instant appeal followed.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

In her Appeal Brief, among other things, Complainant reiterates her allegations. She asserts that
the ROI and the FAD severely fragmented her case in order to trivialize her complaint as if the
alleged incidents were separate and distinct causes of action in and of themselves, instead of
examples of a pattern of unlawful behavior motivated by gender and reprisal. Complainant also
characterizes the investigation as partial and one-sided, asserting that the ROI is incomplete and
that witnesses, including C3, were not interviewed. 5


5
 We note that Complainant also alleged on appeal that she entered into a secret marriage with
PM1 after a night of drinking during a business trip to Las Vegas. She alleged that in November
2015, she learned that she was pregnant with PM1’s child as a result of the couple’s “forced,
pseudo marriage.” It appears that this claim is being raised for the first time on appeal and the
Commission has held that it is not appropriate for a complainant to raise new claims for the first
                                                 11                                     2019002363


In its response, the Agency states that Complainant withdrew her hearing request while discovery
in her case was ongoing, mere days before the Agency was scheduled to depose her, and that
Complainant requested a FAD on the investigative record. The Agency asserts that Complainant
fails to present evidence or argument demonstrating that its decision was in error; and requests that
judgment in its favor be affirmed.

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Disparate Treatment and Hostile Work Environment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary
scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792
(1973). She must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that she was subjected to
an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference of
discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie
case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. 802 at
n. 13. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
its actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately
prevail, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the agency’s
explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530
U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993). The Commission
applies the same McDonnell Douglas analysis to complaints involving retaliation claims. See
Hochstadt v. Worcester Found, for Experimental Biology Inc., 425 F. Supp. 318, 324 (D. Mass.),
aff'd, 545 F.2d 222 (1st Cir. 1976).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and hostile
work environment based on race, sex, pregnancy, and reprisal, we find that the Agency articulated
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions in Claims 1, 6, 7, 8, and 9. We also find no
persuasive evidence of pretext.


time on appeal. See Hubbard v. Dep't of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 01A40449 (Apr.
22, 2004). As such, we will not consider Complainant's new allegation.
                                                12                                    2019002363

Regarding Claim 1, PM1 asserted that Complainant was charged AWOL in December 2015,
because she failed to provide medical documentation to support her absence. PM2 asserted that
Complainant’s AWOL charge for January 2016, was adjusted to FMLA LWOP when Complainant
provided information indicating that her absence was FMLA. Complainant did not refute
management’s explanations, and record evidence reflects that all of her AWOL charges were later
changed to FMLA Sick Leave, Annual Leave or LWOP.

Regarding Claim 6, PM2 explained, and S1 affirmed, that she reviewed and adjusted all clerk and
carrier hours to make the office more efficient. Complainant did not refute these explanations.
Notably, Complainant did not refute PM2’s assertions that had Complainant been willing to work
at the Mojave Post Office in addition to the California City Post Office, Complainant would have
had more hours. However, while we find it questionable for PM2 to make such an offer to
Complainant as PM1, Complainant’s alleged harasser, had been transferred to that location, we do
not find that it was because of her protected status.

Regarding Claim 7, PM2 explained that Complainant's ability to take a break was based on the
availability of help. Complainant disagreed with management’s explanations but failed to refute
PM2’s assertions that Complainant was not denied a lunch break when she worked more than six
hours. Neither did she refute PM2’s recollection that Complainant had stated only that she did not
want to take an early office break.

Regarding Claim 8, PM2 explained that Complainant was not denied bathroom breaks and was
entitled to "as needed" bathroom breaks. Complainant did not refute PM2’s explanations. Neither
did she dispute PM2’s statement that she never objected to management's handling of her "as
needed" bathroom breaks or that Complainant only needed to let S1 know so he could cover for
her while she was gone.

Regarding Claim 9, PM2 explained that Complainant was sent a letter because she had not called
in to explain her absence from work, and that the fact-finding investigation proposed in the letter
did not occur because Complainant provided an explanation and medical documentation to support
her absence. Complainant did not refute PM2’s explanations.

In an effort to show pretext, Complainant identified comparators whom she asserted received more
favorable treatment with respect to leave, work hours, and taking lunch breaks. However, the
record is devoid of evidence to demonstrate that any of the identified comparators received more
favorable treatment than Complainant under the same or similar circumstances. C1 is not a proper
comparator because he did not hold the same position as Complainant. Likewise, both C2 and C4
worked additional hours at the Mojave Post Office while Complainant did not, at Complainant’s
own request. Therefore, all relevant aspects of the comparators' employment situations were not
nearly identical to those of Complainant. As such, Complainant has failed to identify any
similarly-situated comparators who were treated more favorably than she was. See Aguilar v. U.S.
Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01944167 (Aug. 8, 1995) (asserting that in general, in the
absence of direct evidence of discrimination, if the complainant cannot identify any similarly-
situated comparison employees who were treated more favorably, he or she will not prevail).
                                                 13                                     2019002363


To support her sex discrimination allegations, Complainant argued that male employees were
treated more favorably with respect to leave requests, specifically noting that males requesting sick
leave were approved prior to their providing supporting medical information. However, PM1
explained that both C1 and C2 had requested forms prior to leaving. They also filled out the forms,
and brought them back to be submitted to DOL for approval, consistent with applicable rules,
regulations, and instructions. The evidence shows that even though she was informed of the
possibility of being marked AWOL, Complainant failed to provide the required medical
documentation to substantiate her absence upon returning to work.

Complainant also asserted that PM2 told her that PM2 did not have anyone to cover Complainant’s
"pregnancy breaks" or "later in the day lunches." However, record evidence demonstrates that
management was only trying to manage office coverage for efficiency, and that Complainant was
not denied any breaks to which she was entitled. Complainant failed to provide any persuasive
evidence to corroborate the statements attributed to PM2. Complainant also failed to refute
management’s explanations that coverage was needed at the counter when she was not there to
attend to customers, and that Complainant was frequently absent from work. Instead, Complainant
provides her own assertions that management did not treat her fairly. Vague and conclusory
allegations without corroborating evidence do not create a nexus between an adverse action and
an inference of discrimination. Cumberbatch v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120122253
(Oct. 11, 2012) (finding that the Complainant's assertions, made without support, were insufficient
to show that the Agency's reasons constituted pretextual discrimination).

Because Complainant failed to demonstrate that she was treated less favorably than other
employees based on membership in any of her protected classes, she has failed to show that
management was motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Complainant has also failed
to present any persuasive evidence to show that management’s explanations were pretextual with
respect to Claims 1, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Therefore, her disparate treatment and reprisal allegations fail.
To the extent these same claims were used by Complainant to support her additional harassment
claim, they are precluded based on our findings that Complainant failed to establish that any of the
actions taken by the Agency were motivated by her protected bases. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal
Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

Discriminatory Harassment – Claims 2, 3, 4, and 5

To establish a claim of harassment, a complainant must show: (1) he/she belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) he/she was subjected to unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the
protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on the statutorily protected class; (4)
the harassment had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with her work performance
and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for
imputing liability to the employer. McCleod v. Social Security Administration, EEOC Appeal No.
01963810 (August 5, 1999).
                                               14                                   2019002363

Here, Complainant is a member of protected classes; therefore, she meets the first element of her
prima facie case. However, Complainant failed to meet all remaining elements because the record
is devoid of any action taken by PM1, or any other management official, was based on
Complainant’s statutorily protected classes. A finding of discriminatory h a r a s s m e n t i s
precluded by a determination that the complainant has not established that the actions taken by
the Agency were motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Emma B. v. Department
of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120140064 (Apr. 7, 2016). There is also no evidence
that the alleged harassment had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
Complainant’s work performance and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment. Therefore, Complainant has failed to establish her harassment allegations as shown
below.

In Claim 2, Complainant alleged that PM1 threatened to shoot her if she would not have sex with
him. However, Complainant herself stated that there were no witnesses to the alleged incident;
and PM1 asserted that the incident did not occur. Complainant presented no evidence to dispute
PM1’s denial.

In Claim 3, Complainant alleged that she reported the incident alleged in Claim 2 to MPOO but
MPOO did not take appropriate action. However, MPOO asserted that Complainant did not report
the alleged incident to him. He stated that he was unaware of issues of harassment involving
Complainant and PM1 until Complainant wrote a letter to upper management. Record evidence,
in the form of his meeting notes, corroborates MPOO’s assertions which Complainant did not
refute.

In Claim 4, Complainant alleged that PM1 told her that if she did not want to have sex with him,
then he would reduce her hours and lower her pay from Level 7 to Level 6. However, PM1 denied
Complainant’s allegations, explaining that he had used Complainant as a Lead Clerk for some time
which allowed her to earn pay at Level 7. He explained that Complainant was unable to earn that
level of pay because she had stated her unwillingness to continue performing the responsibilities
of the Lead Clerk. Again, Complainant did not refute PM1’s explanations. Neither did she refute
MPOO’s assertions that she did not report any issues of harassment to him regarding a pay
reduction. Moreover, the evidence indicates that PM1 may have previously altered Complainant’s
time and attendance to her benefit, indicating that Complainant was likely unhappy about the
reversal to her normal pay level.

In Claim 5, Complainant alleged that PM1 stood behind her and verbally harassed her while she
worked at the retail counter. She also alleged that he followed her around the workroom floor and
yelled at her. Again, PM1 asserted, and S1 affirmed, that the alleged incidents did not occur. S1
explained that PM1 had only asked that Complainant get back to work and do her job. Even
Complainant’s own witness, C3 who is also female, had noted that she did not hear PM1 make any
statements to Complainant. Moreover, MPOO reiterated that Complainant did not report concerns
about harassment to him; and that PM1 was relocated to ensure that Complainant was treated
fairly, not because of any issues of harassment involving PM1.
                                                15                                    2019002363

Record evidence shows that, at the time of the alleged harassment, Complainant was married to
PM1; that their marriage was kept secret in the workplace; and that PM1 and Complainant did not
take any actions to report their relationship to upper management, which would be especially
important given that Complainant worked under PM1; and, finally, that their marriage may have
been having difficulties at the time these events occurred. Given this, we find both Complainant
and PM1’s statements regarding the actions of the other to be of questionable reliability and
credibility. Under such circumstances, the Commission finds that Complainant’s allegations of
harassment are not sufficiently supported to make a finding of discrimination.

We further note that MPOO took decisive action by bringing S1 in to supervise Complainant in
place of PM1 as soon as MPOO learned of the marriage between PM1 and Complainant. MPOO
also relocated PM1 from Complainant’s work location to ensure that she was not treated unfairly.
Moreover, other than asserting that PM1 still had access to her location, there is no evidence that
Complainant experienced any management conduct that could be categorized as harassment
following PM1’s removal to another office 12 miles away.

Finally, record evidence also indicates that the Agency investigated Complainant’s allegations
following her letter to upper management, and that PM1 denied the allegations against him in that
investigation. Nothing in the record indicates that other information was uncovered following the
investigation that would support a finding of harassment. Certainly, the actions of PM1, an agency
management official, concealing his marriage to a subordinate employee does not demonstrate a
good management practice. The purpose of reporting such relationships and separating married
employees from a supervisory relationship is designed to avoid just such confrontations as
occurred in this case.

We note Complainant’s contentions regarding the investigation conducted in the instant case.
However, Complainant withdrew her request for an AJ hearing at the discovery stage and
requested an Agency decision on the investigative record. Consequently, we do not have the
benefit of an AJ’s credibility determination in this case. We find that Complainant has failed to
meet her burden to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged discriminatory,
retaliatory, and harassing acts occurred or that the Agency’s FAD was in error.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.
                                                  16                                     2019002363

                            STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                                RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.
                                                  17                                      2019002363

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



___________________________                Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 22, 2020
Date
