              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                            Alda F.,1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                       Andrew Wheeler,
                                        Administrator,
                                Environmental Protection Agency,
                                           Agency.

                                    Request No. 2019002298

                                     Appeal No. 0120171676

                                    Agency No. 20140030R13

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120171676 (November 29, 2018).
EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to reconsider
any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the
requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant was employed by the Agency as an Environmental Protection Specialist, GS-12, at
the Agency’s National Center for Radiation Field Operations in Las Vegas, Nevada.

Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging she was discriminated against and subjected to
harassment on the bases of race (African American) and retaliatory animus. Complainant’s claims
included, but were not limited to, being denied training, denial of her request to be removed as a
“Field Team” member; denial of her request to be removed as a purchase card holder; an allegation
that she was held to different standards with respect to promotions and career opportunities; denial
of her request to be exempted from a Capstone Exercise; being exempted from laboratory duties


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019002298

to attend a dry-run training session; being appointed to a health and safety committee; being
assigned health and safety purchase card duties and other purchase card issues; being given “push
back” when she asked to take lunch at a specific time to accommodate a medical appointment;
another supervisor told employees to stay away from her because she filed an EEO complaint; and
that the same supervisor did not respond to her when she greeted him.

Complainant did not request a hearing, and the Agency issued a final decision finding no
discrimination or unlawful retaliation based on the evidence developed during the investigation.
Complainant appealed. In EEOC Appeal No. 0120171676, we affirmed the Agency’s finding that
Complainant failed to prove discrimination or unlawful retaliation as alleged.2

In her request for reconsideration, Complainant expresses her disagreement with the previous
decision on the merits of claims, and reiterates the same arguments made during her original appeal
or attempts to introduce new evidence that was previously available to her. We emphasize that a
request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. See EEO MD-110, Ch. 9,
§ VII.A. Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the request
fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the Commission to
deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120171676 remains the Commission's
decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on
this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United
States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision.
If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the
official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work.




2
  While concluding no discrimination or retaliation was established, the appellate decision did
sanction the Agency for its failure to issue its final decision in a timely manner (more than two
years beyond the regulatory time limit). The Agency was ordered to post a notice and provide
training to its EEO officials. The Agency has not contested this sanction, including in its brief in
response to Complainant’s request for reconsideration.
                                                   3                                      2019002298

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 11, 2020
Date
