             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Franklin P.,1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                       William P. Barr,
                                       Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                                  (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019000246

                                 Agency No. BOP-2016-01109

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 26, 2018, final
decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a Case Manager at the Agency’s prison in
Marion, Illinois.

On October 24, 2016, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint, claiming that the Agency
discriminated against him in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity. By letter dated March 1,
2017, the Agency accepted the formal complaint for investigation and determined that it was
comprised of the following claim:

       On August 26, 2016, [Complainant] became aware that the unit manager, [M1],
       disparaged [his] name by saying inappropriate things about [him] and spreading
       rumors about [him] and [his] family.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019000246

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), finding no
discrimination.

In its final decision, the Agency states “there is little evidence in the record identifying [M1] as
the person who spoke about Complainant’s alleged flirtations.” The Agency further found that
even assuming arguendo that M1 conveyed this information, this action was not sufficient to set
forth a reprisal claim.

The instant appeal followed. Complainant asserts that the investigation was not thorough.
Complainant reasserts that he has been harmed financially due to his divorce.

In response, the Agency requests that we affirm its final decision finding no discrimination.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged incident
occurred as described by Complainant. Complainant alleges that M1 told an individual (I1), who
M1 attends church with and who worked with Complainant’s wife at the time, that Complainant
was “messing around with somebody at work.”2 ROI at 57. Specifically, Complainant states
that he asked his wife “you still think that I was cheating on you or had a relationship with co-
workers?” Complainant asserts his wife responded “Yeah. Someone in your department told
somebody that works at [a named university] that you were seen with two women in your
vehicle.” ROI at 58. Complainant asserts that he told his wife “well that had to have been
[M1].” Id. Complainant states that M1 knew persons at the named university. Id. Complainant
states that his wife responded “yeah, and she told [I1] that you were seen riding around with two
women.” Id.




2
 The record reflects that I1 and Complainant wife at the time were not employees of the federal
government. ROI at 59.
                                                 3                                     2019000246

Complainant further states that he believes M1 reviewed his testimony in a prior EEO case filed
against M1 by one of Complainant’s co-workers. Complainant states that a co-worker (C1)
found his EEO affidavit in 2013 on a shared drive as part of an inmate’s file and that staff
members would have access to this information.3 ROI at 60-62. Complainant believes this
knowledge of his prior EEO testimony resulted in M1 making comments to I1 about an alleged
inappropriate relationship that Complainant was having with a co-worker.

M1 provides a different account regarding the incident in question than Complainant. M1 states
that she goes to church with I1 but has never met Complainant’s wife. ROI at 80. M1 states that
she did not tell I1 that Complainant was cheating on his wife.4 Id. M1, in her affidavit, states
that she was working on a church project with I1 and that I1 was talking to her about people
cheating. Specifically, M1 states that I1 mentioned that a lady who worked for him was talking
about her husband. Id. According to M1’s account, I1 stated to her “he works at your prison.”
M1 stated that she asked I1 “who?” Id. at 81. M1 stated that she responded to I1 “oh, I heard
that” and that was the extent of the conversation. Id. M1, in her affidavit, states that “people [at
work] have been talking about that forever but I don’t care because I don’t get in those people’s
business, but have heard it.” Id. at 82. M1 states that she was aware that her whole staff gave
statements pertaining to a prior EEO complaint brought by another employee. Id. at 85. M1
states, however, that she was not aware that Complainant’s EEO affidavit in this other EEO
complaint was on a shared drive and that she did not read it. Id. at 86.

In the instant matter, Complainant requested a final agency decision, rather than a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). As a result of Complainant’s decision not to elect a
hearing before an AJ, we do not have the benefit of an AJ’s credibility determinations or an AJ
overseeing the further development of the record. Complainant bears the burden to prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged retaliatory act occurred. When the evidence is at
best equipoise, Complainant fails to meet that burden. See Brand v. Dep’t Of Agriculture.
EEOC Appeal No. 0120102187 (Aug. 23, 2012) (complainant failed to establish that his
coworker made offensive comments in a “he said/she said” situation where complainant
requested a final decision and an AJ did not make credibility determinations). Accordingly, we
find that Complainant failed to establish that he was subjected to unlawful retaliation.


3
  The record contains an affidavit from C1. Therein, C1 asserts that she found the EEO affidavit
in question on a shared drive contained in an inmate’s file. ROI at 92-93. C1 states that she
deleted the file and informed SIS. Id. C1 states that when she was contacted via speaker phone
regarding this matter, there were various agency officials present on the conversation, including
M1. However, C1 states that she does not know if M1 actually read Complainant’s EEO
affidavit. Id. at 101. M1 also acknowledges that there was a rumor spreading around the
workplace that Complainant was having an affair and states that “I think it was leaning towards
me being the one that he was having a supposed affair with.” ROI at 96. C1 also states that
Complainant told her that one time his wife hired a private investigator to follow him. Id. at 96-
97.
4
    M1 states that she has never met Complainant’s wife. ROI at 81.
                                                4                                    2019000246

Finally, regarding the matter that Complainant’s affidavit, in a prior EEO case, was placed on a
shared drive, we note that Complainant raised this matter as background information with
respect to the current claim (allegations that M1 told I1 that Complainant was cheating on his
wife).5 The allegation that his EEO affidavit in a prior case was located on a shared drive is not
an accepted claim and is not currently before us. Thus, we decline to address it further herein.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact
               or law; or

       2.    The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
              operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of
Federal Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for
reconsideration in which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405;
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Complainant’s request may be submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail
within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The
agency’s request must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party.


5
  The record reflects that in 2013, Complainant was informed by C1 about his EEO affidavit
being placed on a shared drive. ROI 62-63. Complainant asserts that he did not pursue this
matter at that point in time but contacted the Agency’s EEO office several years later after he
believed it was M1 making comments to I1 about his alleged inappropriate relationship with a
co-worker. Id. at 63-64.
                                                5                                     2019000246

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration
as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 14, 2020
Date
