             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Neville B., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                        Robert Wilkie,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs
                               (Veterans Health Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2019002896

                              Agency No. 200P06782018102430

                                          DECISION

On February 20, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 23, 2019, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission REVERSES and REMANDS the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the Agency subjected Complainant to discrimination on the basis
of disability when his accommodation request, dated September 17, 2017, to remain in a private
office was effectively denied when he was informed on January 2, 2018, that he would be moved
to a shared office space.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Instructional
Systems Specialist, GS-1750-11, at the Southern Arizona VA Healthcare System (SAVAHCS) in
Tucson, Arizona. He joined the Agency after serving 28 years in the Air Force as an Air Force


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019002896

Public Affairs Officer, where he handled, “[o]n-scene, and/or Air Force Command Post media
relations duties for 14 military aircraft and helicopter crashes.” Report of Investigation (ROI) at
147. Following his discharge from the Air Force in 2007, Complainant was diagnosed with anxiety
and depression. Due to these disabilities, Complainant requires a “noise and distraction free
environment.” Id.

From 2009 to 2017, Complainant’s former supervisor (S1), Chief of Education, Training and
Development, accommodated Complainant by providing him with a quiet workspace in the
graphics/media area. From that location, Complainant “produced work that garnered [him] with
mostly Outstanding Yearly Performance reports for eight years.” ROI at 127.

On August 31, 2017, the new Chief of Education, Training and Development (S2) called
Complainant into his office to give Complainant a “written move order from Human Resources”
to relocate to a shared office (Room N157) with two other full-time employees. The proposed
office space was located “in one of the main thoroughfares of the hospital,” where “[h]undreds of
people pass through the noisy adjacent automatic entry doors each day.” ROI at 127.

Upon the advice of his union representative, Complainant visited his long time Board-certified
treating physician on September 6, 2017, to discuss his need for reasonable accommodation.
Complainant’s physician provided him with a letter stating, in relevant part, the following:

       For [Complainant] to perform his essential job functions, he requires accommodations
       from his employer as outlined in the Americans [with] Disabilities Act. The primary need
       is a place to work in a noise and distraction free environment. In order to perform effective
       work, it would NOT [emphasis original] be suitable for [Complainant] to work in a shared
       office due to auditory and visual distractions which could heighten his level of anxiety and
       induce panic attacks. To effectively treat [Complainant] now and in the future, a private
       office space will be required as part of his treatment plan.”

See ROI at 161.

On September 7, 2017, Complainant submitted his reasonable accommodation request to a
member of the facility’s reasonable accommodation committee. ROI at 128. The same day,
Complainant’s union representative informed the Reasonable Accommodation Committee that the
proposal to reassign Complainant was not in accordance with the restrictions imposed by
Complainant’s physician. Id.

Complainant and his union representative met with the Reasonable Accommodation Committee
on November 8, 2017. Complainant recounted that during the meeting, “[a]ny possible work space
[that he] brought up, was dismissed by [S2] due to ‘Education, Training, and Development and
overall SAVAHCS office shortages.’” ROI at 129. Complainant explained that “[he also]
mentioned suitable workspaces in other Education offices, plus Building 30 third floor, and
Building 6,” but he “left the meeting feeling like [S2] had made up his mind, or got his orders from
senior management to deny any possible request[ed] solutions before the ‘interactive’ meeting
                                                  3                                     2019002896

ever took place.” Id. Complainant added that following the meeting, he went on a tour with two
members of the reasonable accommodation committee. Complainant emphasized that he pointed
out possible work spaces to these individuals, and “showed both of them three or more empty
office spaces in the Education area and Building 30, and discussed Building 6.” Id. at 129.
Complainant maintained that following the group tour with the committee members, he went
touring alone and saw several unoccupied private office spaces, as well non-supervisory
employees working in private offices. Id.

In December 2017, the Reasonable Accommodation Committee convened without Complainant
to discuss Complainant’s request. During the meeting, the committee rejected the initial proposal
to reassign Complainant to Room N157 because “it did not offer enough privacy and/or noise
limitations.” ROI at 184-85. Upon further exploration, the committee determined that “space
located in Building 2, Room N160 met [Complainant’s] needs.” Id. Because Room N160 was a
shared office space, the committee also considered a range of options to meet Complainant’s
reasonable accommodation request, such as installing a wall and/or door separating the occupants;
however, the committee members concluded that these options were not feasible given the
structure of the room and relevant safety codes. Id. at 204-5.

In mid-December 2017, the Administrative Officer for Complainant’s unit (S3) 2 appeared at
Complainant’s private office to “write down [Complainant’s] physical phone jack number, and
two computer jack numbers” in preparation for Complainant’s reassignment to Room N160.
Complainant recounted that the S3 told him that S2 asked her to coordinate Complainant’s move,
which was scheduled to occur the first week of January 2018. Complainant told her that he was
not amendable to the move, and he emphasized to her that he did not have to move until a private
office had been located. Id. at 186. Complainant subsequently went on leave for the holidays.

When Complainant returned to the office on January 2, 2018, he saw that the Agency had relocated
his office equipment while he was on leave. ROI at 131. Complainant maintained that “[w]ithout
a work phone or a work computer in Building 30, [h]e was forced to move into Building 2, Room
N160, with two other full-time employees, in order to keep performing [his] job.” Id. In his new
shared office space, Complainant was separated from his two office mates by a large book shelf.
Id. There was also a metal bookcase that the Agency had placed to “quiet the noise.” Id. The male
Human Resources Specialist who handled Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request
explained that the bookcase was already in Room N160 when Complainant was reassigned and
that both the Medical Advisor and Regional Counsel “determined that the bookcase was sufficient
at that time.” Id. at 246.
In a letter dated January 5, 2018, 3 the Agency informed Complainant that while it could not grant
his request for a private office space, “[a]fter coordinating with regional counsel, the determination
was made that an alternate accommodation could be granted thus meeting the intent of [his]


2
  As noted below, the Administrative Officer replaced S2 as the Chief of Education, Training and
Development, following S2’s retirement.
3
  Complainant maintained that he did not receive this letter until June 19, 2018, approximately five
months later. ROI at 158.
                                                4                                    2019002896

request.” ROI at 122. In this regard, the Agency offered to relocate Complainant to Room N1604
which it deemed to be a “sufficiently privatized space” because “[r]esearch indicate[d] that this
space has fewer auditory and visual distractions than [Complainant’s] pre-request work space.” Id.
The Agency also offered Complainant additional accommodations such as noise-canceling
headphones or “white noise” machines. Id.

In April 2018, S2 retired from federal service, and S3 became the Chief of Education, Training
and Development. On June 1, 2018, Complainant contacted S3 by email to express concern about
his involuntary reassignment to Room N160. ROI at 131-33. In his email, Complainant reiterated
that he was forced to move on January 2, 2018, because his computer equipment had been removed
from his private office and relocated to Room N160. Id. Complainant emphasized to S3 that he
had yet to see a “lawful move order.” Complained also expressed concern that his physician’s
orders had been completely ignored by the reasonable accommodation committee. Id. In this
regard, Complainant’s email to S3 emphasized that the metal bookcase that the Agency had
intended to “quiet the noise” was not effective. Id. Complainant informed S3 that his new office
was located right across from the Chaplain’s Office which he noted had a constant stream of
visitors due to its open-door policy. Id. Complainant also noted that the Lost and Found Office
was right next door from the Chaplain’s Office and that people must “pound on the wooden door
to get service.” Id.

In response to Complainant’s email and without consulting him, the Agency removed the metal
bookcase and replaced it with a “two-inch thick divider measuring approximately 5x8 feet.”
Complainant maintained that the divider was ineffective because it provided “zero sound
proofing,” and he emphasized that workspace noise has more than doubled. ROI at 244 and 261.

The Agency also arranged for an Industrial Hygienist to conduct noise monitoring test in Room
N160. ROI at 246. The test was split into two sessions. The first session occurred from August 7-
9, 2018, while Complainant was out of the office. Id. at 208. The second session occurred from
August 14-16, 2018, when Complainant was in the office. Id. On August 20, 2018, the Industrial
Hygienist concluded that the area “did not meet [the] requirements to be considered a hazardous
environment,” which he defined as noise above 85 decibels.” Id. According to the decibel scale
contained in the ROI, a “loud radio” is around 80 decibels and a “bass drum” is around 90
decibels.” Id. at 166.

On March 21, 2018, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of disability (mental) and reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity (making reasonable accommodation request) when his accommodation request, dated
September 17, 2017, to remain in a private office was effectively denied when he was informed
on January 2, 2018, that he would be moved to a shared office space.




4
 The Agency referred to this room as “Room 2N-160.” For ease of reference, we will refer to
Room 2N-160, as Room N160, to reflect Complainant’s usage.
                                                 5                                      2019002896

During the EEO investigation, the Health Systems Specialist at the facility averred that she worked
with both S2 and the Deputy Chief of Staff to find relocation space for Complainant, as
Complainant was working in dedicated office space slated to house the “Medical Media video
workstation” that was to be installed in the near future. ROI at 46. The Health Systems Specialist
maintained that the Medical Media Department “is in a highly secured, card reader protected space
due to the nature of their work” and Complainant was not part of the Medical Media Department.
Id. at 258. She explained that Complainant’s unit made the call to relocate him, but “the Service
of which Medical Media was a part of, was also asking for his relocation.” Id. With regard to
Complainant’s request for a private office, the Health Systems Specialist explained that “all non-
supervisory staff are relegated to a 56-square foot workstation, not a private office,” due to the
“freeze the footprint” national directive and the onboarding of new staff. Id. at 259.

The Human Resources Specialist who accompanied Complainant on the tour clarified that
Complainant never made the Reasonable Accommodation Committee members aware of the eight
noise and distraction spaces that he claimed in his EEO affidavit. ROI at 240. In this regard, the
Human Resources Specialist emphasized that he could only recall Complainant showing him and
the Nurse Practitioner only one additional office space in the “medical media area” of Building
30. Id. at 237. He further emphasized that “[h]e did not recall being shown other empty spaces in
the education area” and he could “say for certain that [they] were never shown spaces in Building
6.” Id. S3 added that the eight spaces that Complainant proposed were either not private offices
or part of different units and, therefore, unavailable. Id. at 196-97.

Complainant disputed management’s explanation and he was incredulous that the Agency could
not find a private office for him somewhere on the 106-acre Southern Arizona VA Healthcare
System, comprising more than one million square feet of floor space. ROI at 141. Moreover,
Complainant emphasized that his prior private office was still vacant and had been since he vacated
the space on January 2, 2018. Id. at 171. To this end, Complainant provided a photograph showing
that “absolutely nothing has changed in the more than seven months since [he] vacated the space.”
Id. at 171. The Health Systems Specialist confirmed that the photograph that Complainant had
provided was indeed Complainant’s prior private office. However, she explained that the Medical
Media team would be “getting another staffer who will probably be seated there” to use the “high-
end [audio-visual] equipment” in the office. Id. at 257. 5

As for the noise monitoring, the Human Resources Specialist explained that he spoke to the
Industrial Hygienist who opined that “the results of the testing indicated a quiet office environment
(when compared to any others tested).” ROI at 246. The Human Resources Specialist emphasized
that “[w]hat is interesting is that the noise levels were highest when the complainant was in the
office indicating that he himself [was] the source of the majority of the noise in the office.” Id.
The Human Resources Specialist maintained that the results of the testing showed that
Complainant’s office was “virtually silent when the complainant was not physically in the office.”
Id. Moreover, the Human Resources Specialist noted that Complainant had not presented any


5
  We are unable to find any audio-visual equipment in the photograph of Complainant’s prior
office (other than two standard computer monitors and computer accessories).
                                                 6                                      2019002896

medical documentation demonstrating an exacerbation of his condition, and to the contrary,
Complainant’s work quality had actually improved since his reassignment to Room N160. Id. at
125. Complainant contended, however, that the sounds recorded during the noise monitoring test
“would distract most people trying to work.” Id. at 165.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In issuing the decision, the Agency conceded that Complainant had established that he was a
qualified individual with a disability because “[b]ased on the record, Complainant ostensibly
satisfie[d] the requisite skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the
position of Education Technician.” The Agency further noted that management did not dispute
that Complainant was able to perform the essential functions of his position with or without
reasonable accommodation.

The Agency, however, found that Complainant failed to show that the Agency did not provide him
with a reasonable accommodation. In this regard, the Agency noted that S1 had accommodated
Complainant by “temporarily placing him in a vacant office space that would later house the
facility’s ‘Medical Media’ video workstation,” which was scheduled to be installed in the near
future. The Agency explained that “[a]round January 2, 2018, management informed Complainant
that he would need to be relocated to another workstation to facilitate the installation and use of
the video workstation.” The Agency emphasized that “all non-supervisory staff members are
relegated to a 56-square foot workstation, not a private office,” due to the lack of sufficient space
to assign non-supervisory employees to private offices. The Agency concluded that Complainant
had indeed been accommodated because it had provided him with a “privatized” office space as
an alternate accommodation. In so finding, the Agency rejected Complainant’s contention that the
provided accommodation was ineffective, as the Agency found that Complainant failed to provide
sufficient “evidence that any distractions he allegedly encountered as a result of being relocated to
the ‘privatized office space’ prevented him from performing the essential function of the Education
Technician position.” The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination as alleged. This appeal followed.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Through his representative, Complainant contends that the alternate accommodation of a
“privatized office” was inadequate to address his disabilities. In this regard, Complainant
emphasizes that: 1) “he provided verbal feedback to his supervisor and subsequent supervisor that
the accommodation made was ineffective”; 2) “provided written feedback to his supervisor and
subsequent supervisor that the accommodation made was ineffective”; and 3) “his disability
(mental) by its very nature does not mean that [he] will assertively act on his behalf and adequately
represent his needs when the very thought of conflict causes anxiety and anguish.” He further
emphasizes that “[t]o imply that he was adequately accommodated because he did not assert
                                                   7                                     2019002896

himself adequately is to once again fail to recognize his needs based on his disability.”
Complainant also adds that “in a case [his representative] represented, a FAD was ordered with
compensatory damages at this very institution for failure to accommodate a Veteran employee
with a disability that needed a private office for the same medical reasons as [Complainant].”6
Complainant emphasizes that in that case, the Agency also cited its policy barring non-supervisory
employees from having offices; however, “the FAD stated that the law made no such assertion
based on pay grade. Rather, the [A]gency shall provide an accommodation unless they can show
undue hardship.” Complainant argues that the Agency similarly failed to accommodate him.

The Agency did not file any contentions in response.

                                      STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (MD-110), at
Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that
the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                    ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Under the Commission’s regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to
the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and
(p). To establish the Agency denied Complainant a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must
show that: (1) he was an individual with a disability; (2) he was a qualified individual with a
disability; and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC
Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation), No. 915.002 (Oct.
17, 2002).

Individual with a Disability

The threshold question is whether a complainant is an individual with a disability within the
meaning of the regulations. An individual with a disability is one who: (1) has a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; (2) has a record of such
impairment; or (3) is regarded as having such an impairment. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g). Major life
activities include such functions as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing,
hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working; and the operation of a major bodily function.


6
    Complainant did not provide a citation to this case, and we are unable to find the case.
                                                 8                                     2019002896

29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). An impairment is a disability if it substantially limits the ability of an
individual to perform a major life activity as compared to the ability of most people in the general
population. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ii).

Here, we note that the Agency, in its FAD, found that Complainant was an individual with a
disability. We concur with this determination, as our review of the record shows that Complainant
has been diagnosed with anxiety and depression, which causes him to be distracted and suffer
panic attacks. See ROI at 161.

Qualified Individual with a Disability

Having found that Complainant meets the threshold requirement which would entitle him to the
protections of the Rehabilitation Act, Complainant must also show that he was a “qualified”
individual with a disability within the meaning of 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). The regulation defines
such an individual as a person who, with or without a reasonable accommodation, can perform the
essential functions of the position in question.

Our review of the Agency’s FAD shows that the Agency found that Complainant was a qualified
individual with a disability because “[b]ased on the record, Complainant ostensibly satisfies the
requisite skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the position of
Education Technician.” The Agency further found that management “does not dispute that
Complainant can perform the essential functions of this position with or without a reasonable
accommodation.” Here, we also concur with this determination because our review of the record
shows that Complainant’s supervisor unequivocally stated that Complainant could perform the
essential functions of his position. ROI at 182. Moreover, we note that the performance appraisals
that are contained in the ROI all indicate that Complainant performed at the fully successful level
or better. Id. at 53-63. Because the record clearly establishes that Complainant was a qualified
individual with a disability, we find that the Agency had an obligation to provide reasonable
accommodation absent a showing of undue hardship.

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

Federal agencies are charged with being a “model employer” of individuals with disabilities. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(a). Inherent in this duty is an obligation to break down artificial barriers
which preclude individuals with disabilities from participating on an equal footing in the work
force. Accordingly, the Rehabilitation Act requires federal agencies to make various types of
“reasonable accommodation” for federal employees who have disabilities. This requirement helps
ensure that federal employees with disabilities will be able to perform the essential functions of
their positions and enjoy all the benefits and privileges of employment enjoyed by non-disabled
employees. See Appendix to Part 1630 - Interpretive Guidance on Title I of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (Appendix to Part 1630), at § 1630.2(o): Reasonable Accommodation.

After receiving a request for reasonable accommodation, an agency “must make a reasonable effort
to determine the appropriate accommodation.” 29 C.F.R. Part 1630, app. § 1630.9. Thus, “it may
                                                 9                                      2019002896

be necessary for the [agency] to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a
disability . . . [to] identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential
reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3); see
also 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. § 1630.9, Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation at
Q. 5. The term “reasonable accommodation” means, in pertinent part, modifications or adjustments
to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held is
customarily performed that enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential
functions of the position in question. See 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(o)(1)(ii). Reasonable
accommodations may include but are not limited to: job restructuring; part-time or modified work
schedules; reassignment to a vacant position; or acquisition or modifications of equipment or
devices. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii). An agency has the obligation to provide accommodations to
a qualified individual with disability absent a showing of undue hardship.

Generalized conclusions will not suffice to support a claim of undue hardship. Rather, a showing
of undue hardship must be based on an individualized assessment of current circumstances that
show that a specific reasonable accommodation would cause significant difficulty or expense. A
determination of undue hardship should be based on several factors, including:

    •   the nature and cost of the accommodation needed;

    •   the overall financial resources of the facility making the reasonable accommodation; the
        number of persons employed at this facility; the effect on expenses and resources of the
        facility;

    •   the overall financial resources, size, number of employees, and type and location of
        facilities of the employer (if the facility involved in the reasonable accommodation is part
        of a larger entity);

    •    the type of operation of the employer, including the structure and functions of the
        workforce, the geographic separateness, and the administrative or fiscal relationship of the
        facility involved in making the accommodation to the employer; and

    •   the impact of the accommodation on the operation of the facility.

While we acknowledge that the Agency provided Complainant with a “privatized” shared office
space in lieu of his requested private office, we find that such accommodation was not effective in
meeting Complainant’s need for a noise and distraction free environment.

Our analysis begins with the results of the August 2018, noise monitoring test. While we
acknowledge that the Industrial Hygienist concluded that the noise level in Complainant’s shared
office did not amount to a hazardous workspace, i.e., 85 decibels or higher, we find that the test
results clearly show that the provided accommodation fell markedly short of a noise and distraction
                                                  10                                      2019002896

free environment. Indeed, our review of the second session of the test 7 shows multiple periods
when the noise level in Complainant’s privatized office ranged from 66 decibels to 84 decibels.
ROI at 211. In lay terms, this means that the noise ranged from “busy street, alarm clock” levels,
all the way to near “bass drum” levels. Id. at 166. We are mindful of the Human Resources
Specialist’s contention that Complainant himself was the source of the noise; however, we find
such contention to be unpersuasive, as our review of the data from the first session, when
Complainant was not in the office, shows that the noise levels in the office exceeded 68 decibels
on multiple occasions. ROI at 214. We agree with Complainant that such noise levels would indeed
be distracting. Therefore, we find that the Agency failed to effectively accommodate Complainant
in this regard.

In reaching this conclusion, we also considered whether it would be an undue hardship for the
Agency to grant Complainant his requested private office; however, we find that such a request
would not constitute an undue hardship. In so finding, we note that Complainant provided
photographic evidence showing that his prior office space was still vacant months after he was
forced to vacate. Our review of the record further shows that the Health System Specialist
confirmed that the photograph did indeed reflect Complainant’s prior office space in the Medical
Media Department. While we are mindful that the Health Systems Specialist averred that
Complainant was forced to relocate because the department “is in a highly secured, card reader
protected space due to the nature of their work,” we note that the Deputy Chief of Staff stated that
the area had “substantial foot traffic to include patients, staff, and visitors.” ROI at 193. Given that
the Medical Media Department was open to “patients, staff, and visitors,” we discern no persuasive
reason as to why the Medical Media Department could not be open to Complainant, particularly
in light of the fact that Complainant worked in the Medical Media Department from 2009 to 2017
with no issues. 8

Moreover, while we understand the Agency’s position that non-supervisory employees are not
entitled to private offices, we note that the Commission has long held that an employer must
modify its policy concerning where work is performed if such a change is needed as a reasonable
accommodation, as long as this accommodation would be effective and would not cause an undue
hardship. Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (Reasonable Accommodation Guidance), EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (as
revised, Oct. 17, 2002). Therefore, we find that the Agency cannot use its policy as a defense to
Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request for a private office.

Where a discriminatory practice involves the provision of a reasonable accommodation,
compensatory damages may be awarded if the Agency fails to demonstrate that it made a good
faith effort to provide the individual with a reasonable accommodation for his or her disability. 42


7
 Complainant was working at the office at the time.
8
  We find that the record persuasively shows that the Medical Media Department had the same
secured status as it did when Complainant was working there. See ROI at 223 (noting that
Complainant would have to get up several times a day to unlock the door to the main part of the
office).
                                                11                                    2019002896

U.S.C. § 1981a(a)(3); Gunn v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120053293 (June 15, 2007).
In this case, we find that the Agency did not act in good faith. As discussed above, the Agency
was aware that Complainant needed a private office as an effective accommodation for his
disabilities; however, the Agency failed to provide an alternate effective accommodation or
demonstrate undue hardship. Consequently, we find that the Agency is liable for compensatory
damages because it has not shown it acted in good faith in accommodating Complainant.

                                          CONCLUSION

We REVERSE the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination and we REMAND the case
to the Agency. The Agency shall comply with the relief in the following Order.

                                             ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions:

     1. The Agency shall immediately take all steps necessary to provide Complainant with
        effective reasonable accommodation, to include allowing him to return to his prior private
        office in the Medical Media Department. If this accommodation is unavailable, the Agency
        shall engage in the interactive process with Complainant to find him a suitable private
        office.

     2. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a
        supplemental investigation to determine whether Complainant is entitled to compensatory
        damages incurred as a result of the Agency’s discriminatory actions. The Agency shall
        allow Complainant to present evidence in support of his compensatory damages claim. See
        Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993). Complainant shall
        cooperate with the Agency in this regard.

        The Agency shall issue a final decision on compensatory damages no later than 30 calendar
        days following the supplemental investigation. The Agency shall pay Complainant the
        compensatory damages as determined by the Agency within 30 calendar days from the date
        of the Agency’s decision on compensatory damages. The Agency shall submit a copy of
        the final decision on compensatory damages to the Compliance Officer at the address set
        forth herein.

     3. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide eight
        hours of training to S3, 9 the Human Resources Specialist, 10 and the Health Systems
        Specialist. 11 The training shall address the Agency’s obligations under the Rehabilitation
        Act with respect to reasonable accommodation requests.


9
  S3 is identified on page 180 of the ROI.
10
   The Human Resources Specialist is identified on page 228 of the ROI.
11
   The Health Systems Specialist is identified on page 252 of the ROI.
                                                 12                                     2019002896

   4. Within 90 calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall consider
      disciplining S3, the Human Resources Specialist, and the Health Systems Specialist. The
      Commission does not consider training to be disciplinary action. The Agency shall report
      its decision to the Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it
      shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, it shall
      set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline. If these individuals have
      left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of their departure dates.

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at the Southern Arizona VA Healthcare System (Tucson, Arizona).
copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly
authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain
posted for sixty (60) consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices
to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said
notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to
be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of
the Commission's Decision," within ten (10) calendar days of the expiration of the posting period.
The report must be in digital format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                  ATTORNEY’S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)),
she is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the complaint.
29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The attorney
shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.
                                                 13                                     2019002896

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 CFR § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or the
agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law; or
2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of
the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the
applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
                                                  14                                      2019002896

statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of
the request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


__________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 22, 2020
Date
