              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Charles M., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                          Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                        (Southern Area),
                                            Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2019002811

                                  Agency No. 4G-350-0057-18

                                 Hearing No. 420-2019-00262X

                                           DECISION

On January 28, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 20, 2018 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Lead Sales and
Services Associate, PS-07/O, at the Agency’s Post Office in Enterprise, Alabama. On May 17,
2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him
based on race (African-American) and reprisal (prior EEO activity) when: (a) on January 13, 2018,
his supervisor during a service talk, asked his coworkers to observe his behavior, and report
anything out of the ordinary; (b) on January 24, 2018, he was instructed to report to the Daleville
Post Office; (c) on January 24, 2018, the Postmaster sent out emails to other Post Office locations,
stating that all workers should be notified that he was a potential threat; (d) on or about February


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2019002811

12, 2018, he was issued a letter of warning (LOW); (e) on or about April 18, 2018, his time was
charged to Leave without Pay, (LWOP); (f) on April 18, 2018, the Area 4 Manager denied his
request for a psychological examination; (g) on unspecified dates, he was followed and observed
by management, and coworkers were asked what he had stated to them; (h) in February 2018, his
request that a Threat Assessment Team (TAT) be sent to the Enterprise Post Office was denied;
and (i) on unspecified dates, the Postmaster discussed his EEO complaint with his coworkers,
and/or asked employees if they provided statements for his complaint. 2

After the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge
(AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). 3 The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.

                                  FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Claim A – January 13, 2018 Service Talk

Complainant testified that on January 13, 2018, one of his supervisors (S1A) conducted a stand-
up talk concerning his return to work in which she allowed White employees who had an ax to
grind to express hostility towards him. S1A testified that she and another supervisor (S1B) were
responsible for giving a stand-up talk regarding Complainant’s returning to work. S1A also stated
that she attended a meeting with the management team on January 12, 2018 and learned that
complainant would be returning to work. S1A further stated that the management team was
instructed to inform employees that Complainant would be allowed to return to his duties
beginning Tuesday, January 16, 2018. She was also told to remind the employees that they were
hired to report to work and maintain professionalism; that they were there to focus on their jobs,
to work diligently, and return home safely to their respective families. S1A denied permitting
hostile behavior by any employee or observing such behavior. S1A affirmed that the talk with the
employees was delivered and received with professionalism.



2
  Complainant initially raised two additional claims that were dismissed for untimely EEO contact.
Complainant does not dispute the Agency’s dismissal on appeal, accordingly, we shall not address
it herein.
3
  The record indicates that Complainant also requested a hearing with the EEOC’s Birmingham
District Office but failed to serve the Agency a copy of the hearing request. The Agency later
learned that Complainant had filed a hearing request after it had issued its final agency decision.
The EEOC Administrative Judge assigned to the matter granted the Agency’s motion to dismiss
the hearing request finding that Complainant could not request both a hearing and a final agency
decision. Further, the AJ noted that Complainant had failed to notify the Agency of his request
for a hearing, had also requested a final agency decision, and had already filed an appeal of the
final agency decision. Complainant raised no challenges regarding this matter on appeal;
therefore, we will not address it further.
                                               3                                    2019002811

In addition, S1A noted that an employee had asked: “What if I feel threatened?” and was told not
to engage but to leave the situation and report it immediately. S1A denied asking the group to
observe Complainant and report back to her.

Claim B – January 24, 2018 Told to Report to Daleville Post Office

The undisputed record shows that on January 24, 2018, the Postmaster (PM) instructed
Complainant to report to the Daleville Post Office. PM testified that she directed Complainant to
report to the Daleville Post Office because of an altercation between Complainant and a co-worker
(C1). PM explained that management needed to separate the two employees while an investigation
was pending. PM denied that Complainant’s race or his prior EEO activity had anything to do
with this instruction.

Claim C – January 24, 2018 Emails

Complainant testified that on January 24, 2018, PM sent emails to other post offices notifying
them that he was a potential threat. PM denied this assertion. The record does not contain any of
the alleged emails.

Claim D – February 12, 2018 Letter of Warning

On February 12, 2018, one of Complainant’s Managers (M1) issued Complainant a LOW. M1
stated that an investigation revealed that Complainant and C1, raised their voices at the window
while discussing an issue. Both Complainant and C1 were charged with unbecoming conduct.
The LOW was expunged after Complainant filed a grievance on the matter.

Claim E – April 18, 2018 Leave without Pay

S1 denied charging Complainant LWOP on April 18, 2018. The TACS Employee Everything
Report for that date indicates that Complainant was recorded as having 8.72 work hours and 0.72
overtime hours on April 18, 2018. The record is devoid of evidence that Complainant was charged
LWOP on the alleged date.

Claim F – April 18, 2018 Denial of Request for Psychological Evaluation

The record shows that Complainant made a request for psychological examination during a
mediation. Complainant testified that he did not believe his race was a factor in his Manager’s
(M2) denial of his request or that M2 was involved in the harassment toward him. However,
Complainant asserted that M2 could have given him a reason for his denial. M2 denied that
Complainant’s race or prior EEO activity was a factor in his decision to deny Complainant’s
request.
                                                 4                                      2019002811

Claim G – Followed by Management and Employees

Complainant testified that S1A followed and observed him and asked coworkers what he stated to
them. S1A denied this allegation. S1A also asserted that she never questioned Complainant’s
coworkers about matters not work-related.

Claim H – February 2018 Denial of Threat Assessment Team

Complainant testified that he asked the District Human Resources Manager (HRM) for a TAT to
be sent to the Enterprise Post Office in February 2018. Complainant also stated that he was told
that a team would be coming but they never did.

HRM testified that on January 23, 2018, PM copied him on an email to M1 describing an incident
that had taken place between Complainant and C1. PM wrote in the email that Complainant
wanted the TAT in the Enterprise Post Office the next day. HRM explained that the TAT did not
go out to offices and investigate incidents, rather, when convened, they examine the facts,
determined the seriousness of the situation and how to diffuse and resolve it. He also testified that
in this case, he determined that this was not a threat requiring TAT intervention, but counseled M1
on the need to investigate and separate the parties while investigating. He further stated that he
did not recall speaking with Complainant about this matter, but guided M1 on investigating
appropriately. He stated that Complainant's race and EEO activity were not factors in his decision.

Claim I – PM Discussed Complainant’s EEO Complaint with his Coworkers

S1 denied Complainant's allegation that she discussed his EEO complaint with his coworkers and
asked them if they provided statements for him. She also asserted that she did not know of anyone
who had done so. S1 further stated that Complainant had not brought this allegation to her
attention. PM denied having knowledge that Complainant had filed an EEO complaint.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).
                                                   5                                       2019002811

Disparate Treatment – Claims D and E

Complainant must satisfy a three-part evidentiary scheme to prevail on a claim of disparate
treatment discrimination. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). First,
Complainant must establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he was subjected to an
adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference of
discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S.
567, 576 (1978). Second, the burden is on the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory,
reason for its actions. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Third,
should the Agency carry its burden, Complainant must then have an opportunity to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the legitimate reasons offered by the Agency were not its true
reasons, but were a pretext for discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804; St. Mary's
Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

We assume for purposes of this decision that Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination and reprisal. M1 articulated a legitimate, non-discriminatory explanation for
issuing Complainant the LOW (i.e., that he engaged in unbecoming conduct at the window). The
record also shows that C1 was also issued a LOW. The record is also devoid of evidence to support
Complainant’s assertion that M1’s explanation was a pretext or that his race or protected activity
was a motivating factor. With respect to Complainant’s allegation that he was charged LWOP in
April 2018, we find the record devoid of evidence that this alleged action ever occurred.

At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of
the evidence that the Agency's reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on the
basis of discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Complainant failed to carry this burden.
Accordingly, we find that Complainant failed to prove unlawful discrimination with respect to
Claims D and E.

Hostile Work Environment

Harassment of an employee that would not occur but for the employee's race, color, sex, national
origin, age, disability, or religion is unlawful, if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive. To establish
a claim of harassment a complainant must show that: (1) he or she belongs to a statutorily protected
class; (2) he or she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on their
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further,
the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).
                                                 6                                     2019002811

Whether the harassment is sufficiently severe to trigger a violation of Title VII must be determined
by looking at the circumstances, including the frequency of the discriminatory conduct, its
severity, whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance, and
whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance. Harris 510 U.S. at 23
(1993); Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002
(Mar. 8, 1994) (Enforcement Guidance on Harris) at pp. 3, 6. The harassers' conduct should be
evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim's circumstances.
Enforcement Guidance on Harris. A single incident or group of isolated incidents will generally
not be regarded as discriminatory harassment unless the conduct is severe. Walker v. Ford Motor
Co., 684 F.2d 1355, 1358 (11th Cir. 1982).

We agree with the Agency that Complainant fails to establish a claim of unlawful harassment.
The record shows that management officials denied Complainant’s allegations. To the extent that
the incidents alleged are established by the evidence, the record is devoid of evidence to support a
conclusion that the totality of all of the conduct at issue was sufficiently severe or pervasive to
establish a hostile work environment. We also find the record devoid of evidence to support
Complainant’s bare, uncorroborated assertions that any of the management officials held
discriminatory or retaliatory bias toward Complainant. The record reflects that the alleged
incidents were more likely the result of routine supervision, managerial discipline, and general
workplace disputes and tribulations. Accordingly, the Commission finds that Complainant was
not subjected to a discriminatory or retaliatory hostile work environment as alleged.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including
those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
                                                   7                                      2019002811

(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)


You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.


                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)


If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  8                                     2019002811

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 18, 2020
Date
