              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                             Vickie T., 1
                                            Complainant,

                                                  v.

                                        Dr. Mark T. Esper,
                                            Secretary,
                                      Department of Defense
                                 (Defense Contract Audit Agency),
                                             Agency.

                                      Appeal No. 2019002230

                                Agency No. DCAA-CASE-W17-009

                                             DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s final decision concerning
her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e
et seq., and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C.
§ 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                          BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Auditor, GS-0511-
12, at the Agency’s Boeing Mesa Resident Office, in Mesa, Arizona. On July 7, 2017, Complainant
filed a complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of age (56) and
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, on May 30, 2017, she was notified that SO (52,
prior EEO activity), the selecting official, did not select her for the position of Supervisory Auditor,
GS-0511-13, in the Albuquerque, New Mexico office, advertised under Job Announcement
Number DCAA-17-WE-1847410. 2



1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  Complainant initially included the bases of race, national origin, religion, and sex in her formal
complaint; however, she subsequently withdrew those bases.
                                                2                                     2019002230

The record indicates that, on November 14, 2016, the Agency issued a job announcement for the
position of Supervisory Auditor in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The announcement stated that the
selected candidate would be responsible for the supervision, conduct, and accomplishment of a
segment of the audit program and serve as a team leader for a group of auditors. The announcement
noted that the incumbent would, among other things, review audit programs, working papers,
progress on the audit assignments, and audit reports; recommend and approve training; recommend
promotions and recognition; and initiate remedial action for performance or conduct deficiencies.

Complainant was one of nine employees who were referred to the SO for further consideration.
The SO assigned three GS-14, Branch Managers, to evaluate the referred candidates, conduct
interviews, and provide her with recommendations for selection. The three supervisors who were
on the interview panel were A1, A2, and A3.

All nine of the applicants who had been certified as eligible for the position were offered
interviews; however, one applicant declined. The panel interviewed the remaining eight
candidates. On January 30, 2017, the panel forwarded its written recommendation to the SO. The
panel noted that telephonic interviews were conducted with the eight candidates and an interview
questionnaire with twelve prepared questions was utilized for all interviews. The panel stated that
its recommendation was based on the candidates’ application packages, questionnaire responses,
interviews, and panel discussions. As its top candidate, the panel recommended C1 (34, no prior
EEO activity). C2 was recommended as an alternate if C1 declined.

The record indicated that C1 was a Senior Auditor in the Albuquerque office with current duties
that the panel felt were like the duties that she would be conducting as a Supervisory Auditor. The
panel members noted that she had significant auditing experience with the Agency including
serving four months as a temporary Supervisory Auditor in 2016, and other federal government
work experience. The panel further noted that her interview answers reflected a sound knowledge
of auditing and supervision, as well as the ability to apply personnel management principles,
including in the areas of employee development and performance. The panel stated that she gave
excellent examples that demonstrated supervisory skills during her interview. In its memorandum,
the panel also observed that C1 demonstrated good people skills during her interview and she was
very outgoing and positive. The panel stated that when C1 discussed her experience with employee
performance problems or working with a difficult manager, she was “candid yet diplomatic.” The
record indicates that C1 earned a bachelor’s and master’s degree in accounting and was a Certified
Public Accountant.

Complainant maintained that her age, which although not stated was obvious from the information
on her resume, and her prior EEO activity were the reasons that she was not selected. She stated
that she had filed two complaints involving two supervisors in the Albuquerque office. She argued
that the management officials involved in the selection process were influenced by B1, who was
the subject of one of her prior EEO complaints. Because of her complaint, B1, Complainant stated,
was temporarily reassigned to another location. She maintained that B1 had been in the
Albuquerque office longer than any supervisor and that upper management or other GS-14
supervisors in that office would be influenced by her.
                                                 3                                      2019002230

Complainant was not aware of any conversation between Albuquerque upper management or B1
and the SO about her nonselection. Complainant also maintained that she had significantly more
experience than C1 given that she has been with the Agency for thirteen years and had mobile,
resident office, sub-office, and private industry experience. She indicated that she had performed
all types of audits and that her experience was more varied than C1’s work experience. She further
stated that she had been assigned to several offices and had audited several large companies and
numerous small contractors; whereas, C1 only had mobile auditing experience and no resident
office experience. The record indicated that Complainant earned a bachelor’s degree in business
administration and accounting, and, like C1, she was a Certified Public Accountant.

Complainant argued that everyone in the Albuquerque office was aware that C1 was “very young”
and that she clearly had less audit experience than her. According to Complainant, “[t]he more
years of experience that you have the better supervisor you are.” Complainant maintained that her
interview went “pretty well” and that she thought she answered all the questions well.
Subsequently, in her rebuttal, Complainant noted, in part, that the SO admitted that she knew C1’s
approximate age, and that C1’s husband was a supervisor in the Albuquerque office for
approximately four years, which Complainant contended gave her an advantage over the other
candidates with regard to the interview.

The SO stated that she did not know Complainant and had never met her. She acknowledged that
she knew C1 because they were assigned to the same office. C1 was a subordinate employee to
the vacant supervisory position. The SO stressed that no supervisor from the Albuquerque office
was part of the panel since the vacancy was in that office, and that she did not re-interview any of
the candidates. After reviewing the applicants’ resumes, and the interview notes of the panel
members and their recommendation, she felt that C1’s interview responses made her the top
choice. The SO noted that the interview questions not only addressed work history, but also
leadership skills, difficult situations, competing priorities, and how to handle employee
performance problems. Regarding Complainant, the SO stated that both she and C1 had “outside”
experience and a variety of work experience, but C1’s interview responses indicated that she was
more focused on leadership and working with the people on her team. The SO noted that work
experience does not necessarily make someone a better leader, and she denied that Complainant’s
age or prior EEO activity played a role.

Among other things, A1 stated that, with regard to Complainant’s interview performance, his
interview notes reflected several instances where he noted that she provided a “weak” response to
a question and that he recalled that her interview was not as successful as others. He opined that
Complainant “could have done better” when addressing certain questions. Overall, he stated that
Complainant was not at the top or bottom in terms of the panel’s assessment of her candidacy for
the position. C1’s interview, he stated, “went really well” and she addressed each question in depth.
He further stated that C1 described her prior experience and how she would handle supervisory
matters, and was enthusiastic, outgoing, and appeared to be a team player. A1 stated that the
panel’s recommendation was unanimous, and he denied that Complainant’s age or prior EEO
activity was a factor in their recommendation.
                                                4                                     2019002230

A2 stated that he did not know any of the candidates. He testified that the panel members were
looking for someone who provided the most pertinent answers to the interview questions and who
seemed like they had good leadership skills. He felt C1 had better leadership skills based on her
interview performance. A2 felt that C1’s current duties were “very similar” to the duties that she
would be supervising in the position and she provided extremely relevant answers that reflecting
sound knowledge of auditing and supervision and an ability to apply personnel management
principles. He placed Complainant nearer the top than the bottom but felt C1 was a better candidate
for the position. He also stated that the recommendation was unanimous and denied that
Complainant’s age or prior EEO activity was a factor in their recommendation.

A3 stated that the panel members were looking for a candidate with good answers to the interview
questions and good communication skills. She, however, could not recall Complainant’s or C1’s
specific interview performance due to the delay in the hiring process caused by the subsequent
hiring freeze. She indicated that she did not know either Complainant or C1, and that the panel’s
recommendation was unanimous. She also stated that Complainant’s age or EEO activity were
not factors.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing
within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim absent direct evidence of discrimination, Complainant
must satisfy the evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-04 (1973). Complainant carries the initial burden of establishing a
prima facie case by demonstrating that she was subjected to an adverse employment action under
circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters,
438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the
particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. at 802 n.13.
                                                 5                                      2019002230

The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the Agency
has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to prove, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the reason proffered by the Agency was a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v.
Sanderson Plumbing Prod., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509
U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

To meet her ultimate burden of proving that the Agency’s actions are discriminatory, Complainant
needs to demonstrate such “weaknesses, implausibility, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or
contradictions in the [Agency’s] proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence.” Evelyn S. v. Dep’t of Labor, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120160132 (Sept. 14, 2017).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on
age and reprisal for her prior EEO activity, we find that the Agency articulated a legitimate, non-
discriminatory reason for her non-selection, i.e., C1 was determined to be the more qualified for
the position than Complainant. We find no persuasive evidence of pretext here. Although
Complainant maintained that she was more qualified because she had more years of experience
than C1, the fact remains that the Commission has long held that mere years of service, or length
of service, does not necessarily make an individual more qualified to meet the needs of an
organization. Kenyatta S. v. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120161689 (Sept.
21, 2017); Collins v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05A41248 (Oct. 5, 2004). Neither
does years of service automatically make an individual more qualified. Ford v. Dep’t of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Appeal No. 01913521 (Dec. 19, 1991).

The Commission will not substitute our judgment for the judgment of selecting officials familiar
with the present and future needs of their facility and therefore in a better position to judge the
respective merits of each candidate, unless other facts suggest that proscribed considerations
entered into the decision-making process. See Williams v. Dep’t of Education, EEOC Request No.
05970561 (Aug. 6. 1998). We find no such evidence of proscribed considerations here.
Complainant offered no evidence to support her speculation that B1 influenced the SO or any panel
member to not select her because of her prior EEO activity. To the extent that Complainant
maintained that C1 may have been preselected, we note that even if preselection occurred, it would
not be unlawful unless Complainant can show that the preselection was driven by discriminatory
animus. See Nickens v. Nat’l Aeronautics Space Admin., EEOC Request No. 05950329 (Feb. 23,
1996). Preselection, per se, does not establish discrimination when it is based on the qualifications
of the selected individual and not some prohibited basis. McAllister v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Request No. 05931038 (Jul. 28, 1994).

Finally, upon reviewing the totality of the record, we simply do not find that Complainant’s
qualifications were so observably superior to those of C1’s that no reasonable person, in the
exercise of impartial judgment, could have chosen C1 over her. Cooper v. Southern Co., 390 F.3d
695, 732 (11th Cir. 2004); see also, Ash v. Tyson Foods, Inc., 126 S. Ct. 1195, 1197-1198 (2006).
                                                 6                                     2019002230

We note in this regard that both candidates, among others, were deemed qualified and referred to
the SO for consideration. Although Complainant had more years of experience, performed more
audits, and worked in a variety of settings, her application did not indicate that she would have
made a better supervisor than C1. The SO noted in this regard that the interview questions not only
addressed work history, but also leadership skills, difficult situations, competing priorities, and
how to handle employee performance problems. She noted that both Complainant and C1 had
“outside” experience and a variety of work experience, but C1’s interview responses indicated that
she was more focused on leadership and working with the people on her team. A2 felt that C1’s
current duties were “very similar” to the duties that she would be supervising in the position and
she provided extremely relevant answers reflecting a sound knowledge of auditing and supervision
and an ability to apply personnel management principles. Reviewing the interview notes, one panel
member, presumably A1, made notations of “weak response” next to two of Complainant’s
responses, and placed question marks next to three of her other responses. Another panel member’s
notes indicated that Complainant had failed to answer two questions. The third panel member’s
notes stated that Complainant failed to provide an example, when requested, of an instance when
she had led a group of people, and, instead, provided an example of leading only one person.

As Complainant did not request a hearing, we do not have the benefit of an Administrative Judge’s
credibility determinations after a hearing; therefore, we can only evaluate the facts based on the
weight of the evidence presented to us. We find no persuasive evidence of discriminatory animus
here.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                   7                                      2019002230

All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be submitted via regular mail
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington,
DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely
filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.


                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  8                                     2019002230

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 12, 2020
Date
