              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Roman G., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Robert Wilkie,
                                           Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs
                              (National Cemetery Administration),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019005894

                              Agency No. 200P-0907-2018103963

                                           DECISION

On August 12, 2019, Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
July 31, 2019, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. The Commission accepts the appeal in accordance
with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405.

                                        BACKGROUND

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a Cemetery Caretaker at the Agency’s
Willamette National Cemetery in Portland, Oregon.

In April 2014, Complainant began working for the Cemetery Caretaker Leader (hereinafter “Team
Leader”). Team Leader was responsible for overseeing the cemetery’s Ground Operations Team
but did not have any supervisory authority over Complainant. Shortly thereafter, Team Leader
began sexually harassing Complainant on a daily basis. On June 5, 2018, Complainant filed an
EEO complaint alleging he was subjected to a hostile work environment (sexual and non-sexual)
based on sex, when from April 2014 and continuing:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019005894

       1.      management failed to intervene after Team Leader touched his genitals as
               he passed through a doorway;

       2.      Team Leader used a guide-pole and various other tools, such as shovel and
               rake handlers, to touch Complainant’s genitals; and

       3.      Team Leader “dry-humped” Complainant.

The Agency noted that Complainant also attested to Team Leader playing “grab-ass” with him and
other co-workers by “grabbing them on the genitals with the back of his hand”. According to
Complainant, he saw Team Leader do this approximately 30 to 40 times. As for using shovel
handles and guide poles to touch Complainant between his legs, Complainant stated this occurred
five or six times a month. Moreover, Complainant saw Team Leader subject at least four other
employees to this behavior. On at least three separate occasions, it was alleged Team Leader
grabbed Complainant’s hips and rubbed his genitals against Complainant’s buttocks.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
on January 31, 2019, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In its decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant proved that the Agency subjected him to
discriminatory harassment as alleged. Three witnesses observed the harassment of Complainant.
One even stated that he too had been subjected to Team Leader’s actions. Further, the witness
explained that despite being asked to stop touching employees, Team Leader continued. Three
additional witnesses stated that although they did not see Team Leader harass Complainant, they
did witness the same conduct by Team Leader directed to other employees. For more than four
years, Complainant was subjected to sexual harassment by Team Leader. Depending on his job
assignment, explained Complainant, the incidents occurred as often as several times a day, to once
or twice every few weeks.

With respect to management’s response, the Agency’s decision noted that following
Complainant’s initial report to managers in April 2018, Team Leader’s sexual harassment ceased
but non-sexual harassment continued. The Agency concluded that while management took prompt
action to separate Complainant and Team Leader, as well as initiate an investigation, it did nothing
to correct Team Leader’s conduct and ensure it would not happen again. Consequently, the Agency
was found to be liable for Team Leader’s harassment. The decision granted Complainant
restoration of leave, ordered EEO training for relevant management officials, and ordered a
supplemental investigation regarding compensatory damages.

On July 31, 2019, the Agency issued a decision on compensatory damages. First the Agency
considered Complainant’s request for past pecuniary damages. The Agency denied any medical
expenses as Complainant did not want to divulge his medical records and did not maintain receipts.
In seeking payment for housing, automobile and travel expenses, Complainant provided monthly
                                                  3                                      2019005894

statements and government price charts. Reasoning that Complainant failed to show how the
expenses were caused by the harassment, the costs were denied. As for future pecuniary damages,
Complainant requested “all future legal matters be covered for future civil legal fees against these
individuals” (i.e. Team Leader and “his known associates”). Instead of presenting quantifiable
out-of-pocket expenses that are likely to occur, the Agency found Complainant simply offered his
own subjective testimony regarding speculative losses. The Agency denied the request.

Turning to non-pecuniary compensatory damages, Complainant sought “the monthly pay, tax
deferred, of all individuals involved . . . who have failed to act appropriately . . . .” In support of
his request, Complainant described his increased cigarette and alcohol consumption, depression,
and insomnia. His step-mother, wife, and uncle reiterated the increase in smoking and drinking
and also observed mood changes, anger, nervousness, and a short-temper in Complainant. The
Agency found the witnesses “present a consistent and credible account of emotional distress
suffered by Complainant” and established a nexus between the Agency’s conduct and
Complainant’s harm.         In determining an appropriate amount, the Agency considered
Complainant’s pre-existing conditions (PTSD, hypertension, hyper-vigilance) and other factors
impacting his emotional distress (OPM data breach and resulting identity theft). In conclusion,
the Agency awarded Complainant $38,000.00 in non-pecuniary compensatory damages.

Complainant filed the instant appeal. On appeal, he reiterates his request for “the monthly incomes
of all involved”, which he calculates to be approximately one million dollars, but acknowledges
that such awards are limited to $300,000.00. Additionally, Complainant highlights the Agency
failure to relocate him or Team Leader, noting that Team Leader was only relocated after another
individual also filed a complaint.

                                   ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Liability

After a complainant has established a prima facie case of harassment, Complainant must establish
a basis for imputing liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th
Cir. 1982). In the case of co-worker harassment, as here, an agency is responsible for acts of
harassment in the workplace where the agency (or its agents) knew or should have known of the
                                                4                                     2019005894

conduct, unless it can show that it took immediate and appropriate corrective action. Enforcement
Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994). In
this case, the Agency does not dispute its liability, as illustrated by its decision awarding
compensatory damages. Nonetheless, we find it helpful to expand upon the Agency’s description
of management’s response to the harassment before conducting an analysis of the harm suffered
by Complainant.

In the instant case, Complainant was subjected to sexual harassment by Team Leader for
approximately four years. Following the death of his father, Complainant reported the harassment
to the Executive Director during his April 2018 visit to the cemetery. The Executive Director, in
turn, informed Complainant’s first-line supervisor (“Supervisor”) “to handle” the situation.
Supervisor contacted Human Resources, who suggested that he interview Complainant’s co-
workers. According Supervisor, when he asked the HR official if Team Leader could be removed,
HR raised concerns regarding the appearance of retaliation against Team Leader since Team
Leader was the subject of an Administrative Investigations Board (AIB) investigation that pre-
dated the alleged harassment. While “it was obvious” to Supervisor that Team Leader should have
been moved, he lacked the authority to transfer or move employees. The Supervisor attested that
all he was able to do was to provide some separation by moving Complainant to another
assignment. According to Supervisor, “[a]s more allegations came in, I also moved those
employees as far away from [Team Leader] as I could.”

The record indicates that, aside from Supervisor’s efforts, no action was taken by management in
the weeks that followed Complainant’s reporting. It was not until Complainant met with an EEO
Counselor and the Counselor contacted management, on May 17, 2018, that any actions were
taken. 2 Those actions were inadequate. HR simply advised “moving Complainant, EEO training
for the facility, and advising on situational awareness.” One upper-management official attested
that Team Leader was never disciplined, “never sent home or anything. Nothing has happened to
him.” We find that management did not take appropriate corrective action.

This occurred despite the fact that during Executive Director’s April 2018 visit, he met with
managers and it was discussed that three employees (two males and one female) had alleged sexual
harassment by Team Leader. The HR official acknowledged that during the AIB investigation of
Team Leader he was “inundated with claims against [Team Leader] from numerous parties,”, but
disregarded them as possible reprisal for Team Leader’s whistle-blower activity in the AIB.
Moreover, the HR official attested that the alleged actions were “commonplace for years as guy
pranks or what guys do.” This “boys will be boys” attitude, expressed by an HR official,
demonstrates a hostile work environment that was easily discernable and should have been
recognized and acted upon by management. Likewise, given the severity, frequency, and duration
of Team Leader’s conduct, not only toward Complainant, but others as well, the Agency should
have known of the sexual harassment and taken swift, appropriate, and effective action. It did not,
resulting in further harm to Complainant.


2
 According to the formal complaint, the sexual harassment continued until May 30, 2018.
Thereafter, Team Leader continued to subject Complainant to non-sexual harassment.
                                                 5                                      2019005894


Compensatory Damages

When discrimination is found, the agency must provide the complainant with a remedy that
constitutes full, make-whole relief to restore him as nearly as possible to the position he would
have occupied absent the discrimination. See, e.g., Franks v. Bowman Transp. Co., 424 U.S. 747,
764 (1976); Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 418-19 (1975); Adesanya v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01933395 (July 21, 1994). Pursuant to section 102(a) of the Civil Rights
Act of 1991, a complainant who establishes unlawful intentional discrimination under Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. may receive
compensatory damages for past and future pecuniary losses (i.e., out-of-pocket expenses) and non-
pecuniary losses (e.g., pain and suffering, mental anguish) as part of this “make whole” relief. 42
U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(3). Compensatory damages do not include back pay, interest on back pay, or
any other type of equitable relief. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(2). In West v. Gibson, 527 U.S. 212
(1999), the Supreme Court held that Congress afforded the Commission the authority to award
compensatory damages in the administrative process. For an employer with more than 500
employees, such as the Agency, the limit of liability for future pecuniary and non-pecuniary
damages is $300,000, 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(3)

To receive an award of compensatory damages, a complainant must demonstrate that he or she has
been harmed as a result of the agency's discriminatory action; the extent, nature, and severity of
the harm; and the duration or expected duration of the harm. Rivera v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 01934157 (July 22, 1994), req. for reconsideration denied, EEOC Request No.
05940927 (Dec. 11, 1995); Compensatory and Punitive Damages Available Under Section 102 of
the Civil Rights Act of 1991, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (July 14, 1992), at 11-12, 14.

       Pecuniary Compensatory Damages

Pecuniary losses include quantifiable out-of-pocket expenses that are incurred as a result of the
discriminatory conduct. To recover damages, the complaining party must prove that the employer's
discriminatory act or conduct was the cause of his loss. Enforcement Guidance: Compensatory
and Punitive Damages Available Under Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (Enforcement
Guidance), EEOC Notice No. 915.002, at 8 (July 14, 1992).

When asked about his out-of-pocket expenses, Complainant stated that he did not keep receipts.
The only costs reflected in the record are March 2019 statements regarding his mortgage and his
auto loan. We agree with the Agency, that Complainant has failed to establish any nexus between
these expenses and the harassment. Complainant is not entitled to pecuniary compensatory
damages.

       Non-pecuniary Compensatory Damages

Non-pecuniary losses are losses that are not subject to precise quantification, i.e., emotional pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing,
                                                  6                                      2019005894

injury to character and reputation, injury to credit standing, and loss of health. See EEOC Notice
No. 915.302, Enforcement Guidance on Compensatory and Punitive Damages Available Under
Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, at 10 (July 14, 1992). There is no precise formula for
determining the amount of damages for non-pecuniary losses except that the award should reflect
the nature and severity of the harm, and the duration or expected duration of the harm. See Loving
v. Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29, 1997). The Commission notes
that non-pecuniary compensatory damages are designed to remedy the harm caused by the
discriminatory event rather than to punish the Agency for the discriminatory action. Furthermore,
compensatory damages should not be motivated by passion or prejudice or be “monstrously
excessive” standing alone but should be consistent with the amounts awarded in similar cases. See
Ward- Jenkins v. Dep't of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01961483 (Mar. 4, 1999).

Evidence from a health care provider or other expert is not a mandatory prerequisite for recovery
of compensatory damages for emotional harm. See Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal
No. 01952288 (Apr. 18, 1996) (citing Carle v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369
(Jan. 5, 1993)). Objective evidence of compensatory damages can include statements from
Complainant concerning his emotional pain or suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of
enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to character or reputation, injury to credit
standing, loss of health, and any other non-pecuniary losses that are incurred as a result of the
discriminatory conduct. Id. Statements from others including family members, friends, health care
providers, other counselors (including clergy) could address the outward manifestations or
physical consequences of emotional distress, including sleeplessness, anxiety, stress, depression,
marital strain, humiliation, emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, or a nervous
breakdown. Id.

Moreover, the Commission has long held that a complainant's own testimony, along with the
circumstances of a particular case, can suffice to sustain his burden in recovering compensatory
damages for emotional harm. The more inherently degrading or humiliating the agency's action is,
the more reasonable it is to infer that a person would suffer humiliation or distress from that action.
Therefore, somewhat more conclusory evidence of emotional distress will be acceptable to support
an award for emotional damages. See, e.g., Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
01952288 (Apr. 18, 1996).

An award of non-pecuniary, compensatory damages should reflect the extent to which the
Agency's discriminatory action directly or proximately caused the harm, as well as the extent to
which other factors also caused the harm. See Johnson v. Dep't of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No.
01961812 (June 18, 1998). It is the complainant's burden to provide objective evidence in support
of his claim and proof linking the damages to the alleged discrimination. Papas v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01930547 (Mar. 17, 1994); Mims v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal
No. 01933956 (Nov. 23, 1993).

Here, Complainant attested that his drinking and smoking increased dramatically because of the
sexual harassment. He became more angry, short-tempered, and depressed. Complainant explained
that he was verbally abusive to his wife and critical of his son. He was socially distant with friends
                                                 7                                     2019005894

and family. His pre-existing conditions (PTSD, hyper-vigilance, and hyper-tension) were
aggravated by the harassment. For example, Complainant had to always modify his route to work
or the grocery store. If he heard a noise at home, he would walk the house, check camera feeds on
his phone, and check the security lights. Letters from Complainant’s wife, mother, step-mother
and uncle reiterated the emotional toll he suffered. They each confirmed his increased smoking
and drinking. His step-mother, explained that Complainant changed from “an easy-going, spur of
the moment, out and about person, to someone who would rather stay home.” Visits to him have
to planned in advance, not spontaneous. Once “laid back and carefree”, Complainant’s wife
described his swift mood swings from happy to “upset and agitated.”

The Agency has already conceded that these witnesses “present a consistent and credible account
of emotional distress suffered by Complainant” and establish a nexus between the Agency’s
conduct and Complainant’s harm. After careful consideration of the evidence of record, we find
an award of $75,000 for non-pecuniary compensatory damages is appropriate. This amount takes
into consideration the nature of the discriminatory acts, the severity of the physical and emotional
harm suffered, the length of time Complainant suffered the harm, and is consistent with prior
Commission precedent. See Emmett W. v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120143098 (May
3, 2016) (awarding $80,000 where complainant experienced exacerbated PTSD, depression,
sleeplessness, anger, stress, weight loss, familiar strain, and humiliation); Mardell B. v. Soc. Sec.
Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0120172035 (Oct. 31, 2017) (awarding $70,000 where complainant
suffered exacerbated medical conditions, became depressed, suffered emotionally, and
experienced physical changes because of the discrimination); Crear v. Department of Veterans
Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 07A50079 (January 26, 2006) ($70,000 awarded in sex-based
harassment case where complainant experienced anger, worry, embarrassment, feelings of
disrespect and degradation, sleep problems, hair loss, and problems with her husband and
children).

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record, we hereby MODIFY the Agency’s decision on
compensatory damages. The matter is REMANDED to the Agency in accordance with this
decision and the ORDER below.

                                              ORDER

To the extent it has not already done so, the Agency is ORDERED to take the following action
within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date this decision is issued:

   (1) Provide Complainant with payment of $75,000.00 in compensatory damages.

   (2) Restore any and all leave taken by Complainant as a result of the harassment.

   (3) Provide at least eight (8) hours of in-person training for the management officials
       involved in this matter, particularly regarding recognizing a hostile work
                                                 8                                     2019005894

       environment and addressing management’s responsibilities with respect to
       eliminating harassment in the workplace.

   (4) Shall consider taking disciplinary action against Team Leader, who was found to
       have subjected Complainant to sexual harassment. The Agency shall report its
       decision. If the Agency decides not to discipline Team Lead, it shall set forth the
       reason(s) for its decision not to impose any additional discipline.


                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Willamette Cemetery, located in Portland, Oregon, copies of
the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced,
or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance
Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision,"
within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital
format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g).

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
                                                  9                                     2019005894

complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated.               See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                 RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency to
continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from
                                                  10                                      2019005894

the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which the
Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



____________________________               Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 31, 2020
Date
