              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Sheryl S.,1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Andrew M. Saul,
                                         Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 0120182285
                                    Agency No. CHI-17-0682

                                            DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s May 18, 2018, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the
Agency’s final decision, and REMANDS her complaint for further processing in accordance with
the ORDER below.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s final decision should be vacated because the investigation was insufficient
and does not allow the Commission to determine whether Complainant’s removal was the result
of an unlawful discriminatory motive.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Reader Assistant,
GS-5 at the Agency’s Region V facility in Columbus, Ohio.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    0120182285

On August 15, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the bases of age (48) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when her two-
year limited appointment as a Reader Assistant was terminated on May 17, 2017.

Complainant was responsible for, inter alia, reading and assisting C1, an Agency employee who
was blind. Complainant was hired on a time-limited appointment (2 years) with a service
compensation date of March 30, 2003. The Agency extended the appointment six (6) times
between 2003 and 2016; the last extension was on April 18, 2016. Complainant worked as a Reader
Assistant for C1 for 14 years prior to her termination.

Complainant’s first level supervisor was the Assistant Manager (RMO1). The District Manager
(RMO2) served as Complainant’s second level supervisor. Complainant stated that management
was aware of her age due to its accessibility to her personnel documents. She also recalled that
RMO2, and she had discussions regarding her adult children, and RMO2 was present when she
received a birthday card from all the staff.

Complainant stated that, on May 3, 2017, she was notified that her employment with the Agency
would be terminated, effective May 17, 2017. She stated that RMO2 was responsible for her
termination. She further stated that RMO1 informed her that she was being terminated for telling
a non-governmental employee that the Agency “had bed bugs,” and because C1 was not getting
along with her and no longer wanted her as his Reader. Complainant stated that she received a
notice informing her that the termination was based on her failure to follow Agency policy
regarding treating other employees with courtesy and respect. The notice also indicated that
management had had several prior discussions with Complainant on the “expectation of
professional and courteous behavior towards co-workers.” Complainant further stated that RMO1
informed the EEO counselor that there were also problems with her work.

Complainant asserted that she discussed the bed bug problem with a friend, but, according to
Complainant, this was not a ground for dismissal. Complainant contended that she was a good
employee who would do additional work. She stated that she received good performance
evaluations, and a rating of “Successful Contribution” in all categories of her 2016 evaluation
regarding interpersonal skills; specifically, participation in “demonstrating job knowledge and
maintaining generally positive and productive working relationships within the office.”

Complainant stated that her age was a factor in her termination because during the fourteen (14)
years, she worked with the Agency, she was not allowed to apply for any internal jobs unless they
were also open to the public. She stated that RMO2 treated younger employees more favorably
than the older employees. She also stated that several employees were very disrespectful towards
employees with disabilities, yet management took no action.

RMO1 stated that Complainant’s two-year appointment with the Agency was terminated because
she failed to communicate with C1 in a professional manner and that her services were no longer
meeting RMO1’s needs. RMO1 further stated that she had received “numerous” complaints
regarding Complainant’s conduct, work performance and work ethic.
                                                3                                     0120182285

RMO1 stated that she had discussed these concerns with Complainant during the midterm
evaluation.    RMO1 specifically discussed with Complainant the “negative impact of
communicating about assigned work through emails only, as opposed to reading the paperwork to
C1.” She also discussed the need for Complainant to pay attention to her spelling and grammar in
order to improve her writing skills. RMO1 denied that age was a factor in the decision to terminate
Complainant. RMO1 noted that Complainant’s contract provided that she could be terminated if
her services were not acceptable to C1 or the assigned component.

RMO2 stated that C1 met with her and described his frustration with Complainant. He and
Complainant had four to six outbursts between June 2015 through May 2017. An example included
the statements concerning Complainant’s discussion of the bed bugs. Management spoke with
both C1 and Complainant regarding a lack of professionalism in their communications. RMO2
testified that she decided that termination was appropriate since Complainant’s services were no
longer acceptable to C1. RMO2 denied that age was a factor in her decision.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing
within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant, in pertinent part, challenged the Agency’s assertion that C1 found her
services unacceptable and supported her termination. Among other things, Complainant noted
that: C1 filed an EEO complaint against the Agency alleging the denial of a reasonable
accommodation with respect to the removal of Complainant as his Reader; and that C1, in a
notarized statement, dated June 23, 2017, disputed RMO2’s assertion that he no longer wanted
Complainant to be his Reader. Complainant noted that C1’s statement was provided to the EEO
counselor but was not made part of the Report of Investigation.

In response, the Agency, in pertinent part, argues that the Commission should not consider the
evidence that Complainant seeks to introduce for the first time on appeal. Although the Agency
never directly addressed Complainant’s assertion that C1 did not want her terminated and that her
services were not acceptable, it reasserts RMO2’s testimony that “[C1] expressed complete
dissatisfaction with [Complainant] and stated that “he no longer needed her services.”

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
                                                 4                                      0120182285

Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

At the outset, we disagree with the Agency’s position that C1’s notarized statement is new
evidence being presented for the first time on appeal. In this regard, we note that the EEO
counselor’s report references a statement from C1 that was listed as Attachment B. The record
provided by the Agency, however, does not contain an Attachment B to the report. Moreover, in
her affidavit, Complainant references the statement by C1 noting the contradiction between what
he stated and what RMO2 claimed he stated. Because C1’s statement was, apparently, part of the
EEO counselor’s report, we find that it is not new evidence and it will be considered.

In his statement, C1 wrote that:

       I am making this statement to clarify that I did not ask District Manager [RMO2]
       to discharge [Complainant], my personal assistant/reader. In April 2017, I went to
       [RMO2’s] office to ask about the bed bug issue in our office. I asked if there were
       any live bed bugs found under my desk. I also asked what management had said
       about bed bugs around my desk to other employees because there appeared to be
       some miscommunication. [RMO2] stated that she had noticed some tension
       between [Complainant] and me. I said that, yes, there had been some tension. I said
       that I wanted to get things worked out. [RMO2] said that [Complainant] had her
       bi-annual review coming up and that she would take care of it.

       I assumed that she meant that she would try to mediate issues between
       [Complainant] and myself. We have worked together daily for 14 years at this
       office. I never expected [RMO2] to terminate [Complainant]. I did not say that I no
       longer wanted [Complainant] as my reader, as alleged by [RMO2]. I did not say
       that she was failing to perform her job satisfactory. As a blind employee, I relied
       on [Complainant] to help me do my job and her absence for the last month has
       caused serious problems for me. When I learned about [Complainant’s]
       termination, I spoke to [RMO2] and told her that I did not expect her to fire
       [Complainant]. I told her that I thought she would mediate and help resolve
       tensions. I have asked [RMO2] to reinstate [Complainant] as my reader/personal
       assistant.

In the instant case, we find that the investigative file contains insufficient information upon which
to determine whether Complainant’s removal was the result of an unlawful discriminatory motive.
The requirement that an agency investigate complaints of discrimination is codified at 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108. This regulation requires an agency to develop an impartial and appropriate factual
record upon which to make findings on the claim or claims raised in the complaint. Id. §
1614.108(a). “An appropriate factual record is one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw
conclusions as to whether discrimination occurred.” Id.
                                                5                                     0120182285

The investigator is required to conduct a thorough investigation--identifying and obtaining all
relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome. EEOC
Management Directive 110, p. 6-8 (Aug. 5, 2015). While this requirement does not compel the
investigator to engage in irrelevant and superfluous inquiry, it does require that the investigator
exhaust those sources of information likely to support the positions of complainant and the agency.
Id.

We cannot conclude that the Agency’s investigation into the present case met this requisite level
of development. As discussed above, the Agency failed to interview C1 for the investigation.
Notwithstanding the fact that, according to RMO2, C1’s concerns and preferences were the reason
that Complainant’s employment was terminated. The fact that C1 provided a statement that
contradicted RMO2’s articulated reasons for Complainant’s removal makes it even more essential
that he should have been interviewed for the investigation. We find it highly implausible that the
Agency was not aware that C1 gave a statement to the EEO counselor, and that the statement was
attached to the EEO counselor’s report. The investigator did not indicate why C1 was not
interviewed or why his statement was not made a part of the record. By not investigating evidence
that directly contradicts management’s articulated reason for Complainant’s removal, we find that
the investigator did not conduct a through investigation into this matter.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency's final decision is VACATED. The complaint is hereby REMANDED
to the Agency for further processing in accordance with this decision and the Order below.

                                             ORDER

Within 60 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct and complete a
supplemental investigation consistent with this decision and with the requirements of 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108(b) and EEO MD-110. The Agency shall obtain detailed affidavits and relevant
documentary evidence. The supplemental investigation shall include, at a minimum, the following:
a detailed investigative affidavit or other sworn/affirmed statement from C1 addressing the matters
set forth in his June 23, 2017, notarized statement. Among other things, the EEO investigator shall
ask this witness about the contradictions between his statement and the affidavits provided by
RMO1 and, specifically, RMO2. If C1 is no longer available, an explanation for his unavailability
shall be provided for the record. Complainant shall be provided an opportunity to review the
evidence collected during the supplemental investigation, including the investigative affidavit of
C1, and submit a new affidavit.

Following the completion of the investigation, the Agency shall issue a new final decision on
Complainant's complaint, with notice of appeal rights as provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
                                                 6                                     0120182285

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, including a copy of the
supplemental investigative report and a copy of the final decision, in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 CFR § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.
                                                   7                                      0120182285

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.


                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  8                                      0120182285

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 17, 2020
Date
