              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Rusty C., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Robert Wilkie,
                                          Secretary,
                                 Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2019005662

                                 Hearing No. 520-2017-00371X

                              Agency No. 200H-0518-2016103787

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 19, 2019, final order
concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission REVERSES the Agency’s final
order.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue is whether the Administrative Judge properly issued a decision without a hearing, finding
that Complainant did not establish that he was subjected to a hostile work environment based on
his race.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Boiler Room Operator
at the Agency’s Medical Center in Bedford, Massachusetts. Complainant stated that on January 1
and 4, 2016, a coworker (CW) harassed him by stating that Complainant was unprofessional,


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2019005662

incompetent, and disrespectful. Complainant further stated that CW stated that Complainant did
not know English, and that he should learn English. Complainant stated that he reported the
incident to his first-line supervisor (S1).

Complainant stated that on April 26, 2016, CW wanted to leave his shift early, and when
Complainant responded that CW’s shift was not over, CW stated, “You need to learn English.” A
witness (W1) submitted a report of contact (ROC), stating that CW was “screaming” at
Complainant to learn English. Complainant stated that on May 10, 2016, CW sent an email in
which CW switched Complainant’s name with the word “wrong,” and called him “Mr. Wrong.”
Complainant stated that on May 17, 2016, CW came within inches of his face, stating, “Go back
to learn English.”

Complainant stated that on June 10, 2016, CW closed the gate to prevent Complainant from
entering the premises. Complainant stated that he asked CW to open the gate, who responded that
he could not understand Complainant and to “Go back and learn English.” W1 stated that he
witnessed the interaction and pushed the button to open the gate for Complainant. Complainant
stated that on June 13, 2016, CW confronted him again in the locker room, repeatedly stating that
he did not understand Complainant, and that he should “speak English.” Complainant stated that
on June 20, 2016, CW again refused to open the gate, repeatedly stating that Complainant should
“go back and learn English.”

On June 28, 2016, Complainant’s second-line supervisor (S2) offered Complaint a shift change as
“an interim measure.” Complainant declined the offer. On July 22, 2016, CW was detailed to the
Office of Chief Environmental Management Services. On August 6, 2016, the Associate Hospital
Director (AHD) initiated a management inquiry into an allegation of a hostile work environment
caused by CW, after receiving a complaint signed by the Boiler Plant Operators and Utility System
Respond Officers. AHD stated that after he received the results of the inquiry, he authorized a
supervisor to be on the same floor as the “booth,” authorized the installation of cameras, and
requested routine patrols by police.

On March 15, 2017, Complainant obtained a restraining order against CW from a local district
court. On March 3, 2018, the Chief, Engineer Services (CES) initiated CW’s removal, noting that
CW’s conduct toward Complainant was an example of his “unprofessional and threatening
behavior.” CES added that following the expiration of Complainant’s restraining order, the
Agency authorized police officers to be present to “curtail hostilities” between CW and
Complainant. However, CES stated that CW would return after the police officers left to “surprise
and intimidate” Complainant, outside of the coverage areas of the security cameras.
                                               3                                    2019005662

EEO Complaint

On June 3, 2016, Complainant contacted an EEO Counselor and filed an EEO complaint on August
10, 2016, alleging that the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment based on his race
(Asian) when:

    1. since January 2016, and continuing, management has failed to take actions to end the
       harassment of Complainant by CW, despite the repeated requests of Complainant and other
       coworkers;

    2. on January 1, 2016, CW confronted Complainant in the locker room and called him
       unprofessional, incompetent, and disrespectful;

    3. on January 4, 2016, CW confronted Complainant regarding the January 1st incident, then
       followed Complainant into the locker room where he continued to harass him;

    4. on April 26, 2016, CW cornered Complainant in the locker room while screaming things
       like “I do not understand you!” and “Learn to speak English”;

    5. on May 10, 2016, CW sent Complainant a harassing email about making proper log entries;

    6. on May 17, 2016, CW cornered Complainant in the locker room and stood within inches
       of him, refusing to move back, as he continuously asked Complainant if he could leave
       now that Complainant was there;

    7. on June 10, 2016, CW ignored Complainant and refused to open the safety gate, so
       Complainant could not enter the plant;

    8. on June 13, 2016, CW confronted Complainant in the locker room, even after being told
       he should keep away from Complainant; and

    9. on June 20, 2016, CW refused to open the safety gate, making it so that Complainant could
       not enter the plant.

At the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant was provided a copy of the investigative file
and requested a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency filed a Motion
for Summary Judgment, which Complainant opposed. 2 The AJ issued a decision without a hearing
finding no discrimination.




2
  The AJ noted that Complainant’s brief was a day late; not provided to the Agency; and exceeded
the AJ’s order limiting it to 15 pages. However, the AJ considered the first 15 pages of the
submission.
                                                 4                                     2019005662

As an initial matter, the AJ determined that there were no disputed material facts. The AJ found
that Complainant failed to show that the events were motivated by his race. The AJ noted that
other employees, outside of Complainant’s protected class, suffered the same treatment by CW,
and that CW harassed those who were physically smaller than him, like Complainant.

The AJ stated that Complainant alleged that he was subjected to a hostile work environment when
on April 26, 2016, CW stated that Complainant should “learn to speak English,” and on June 20,
2016, a coworker heard CW call Complainant a “gook.” 3 However, the AJ found that, even
assuming that these comments were made, they occurred two months apart, and were not severe
or pervasive to alter the conditions of Complainant’s workplace. The AJ also found that it was
“undisputed” that the Agency did not become aware of these two instances of racially motivated
comments until after Complainant filed his EEO complaint.

Further, the AJ stated that “[s]ignificantly, the Agency took prompt and appropriate corrective
action” when it: (1) added a camera surveillance system; (2) detailed police officers to patrol; (3)
moved a supervisor’s office to better supervise CW; and (4) offered to change Complainant’s shift,
which he rejected “without participating in the interactive process.” The AJ concluded that
Complainant did not establish that the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment based
on his race and “dismissed” Complainant’s complaint. 4 The Agency’s final order implemented the
AJ’s decision.

Complainant filed the instant appeal and submitted a brief in support of his appeal.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Through his attorney, Complainant argues that the Agency failed to take appropriate action. For
example, Complainant notes that after the May 17, 2016, encounter with CW, he and other
witnesses reported the incident to S1, and that no action was taken prior to the filing of his EEO
complaint. Complainant also argues that the Agency should have known prior to the date when
Complainant filed his formal EEO complaint, and that it failed to properly investigate his
allegations. Complainant points out that S1 stated that Complainant’s “race just gave [CW] a venue
to harass him,” and that S1 did not believe that there was racial harassment since CW also harassed
others on “their sensitive points.” 5 Complainant requests that the Commission remand his
complaint for a hearing.



3
 Complainant states that this coworker provided a ROC describing this incident, and that the
Agency failed to produce and include this ROC in the record.
4
  We note that the AJ did not actually dismiss the complaint. Rather, the Complaint was remanded
to the Agency for further action, resulting in the Agency’s final order.
5
  Complainant states that the other harassed employees were disabled veterans with post-traumatic
stress disorder.
                                                 5                                     2019005662

The Agency opposed Complainant’s appeal. The Agency argues that taken as a whole, the
incidents were not severe or pervasive, nor due to Complainant’s race. Further, the Agency asserts
that it cannot be held liable for creating a hostile work environment in the situation where the
coworker is the harasser unless it knew, or should have known, that the alleged harassment was
based on the victim’s protected class and failed to take action to quell the harassment. The Agency
argues that the record does not support that the Agency had actual or constructive notice of
Complainant’s claim of race discrimination prior to the filing of his formal EEO complaint.

In addition, the Agency argues that there is overwhelming evidence showing that the Agency took
a number of effective actions to address Complainant’s concerns. The Agency asserts that “eight
days after the last claim (Claim 9), the Agency offered [Complainant] a chance to change his hours
so that he wouldn’t have to interact or see” CW. The Agency also noted the installation of security
cameras, police presence, and additional supervision, and as such, there is no basis for imputing
liability to the Agency. The Agency requests that the Commission affirm its final order adopting
the AJ’s decision.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions, and
the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that a
“decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other words,
we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and the Agency’s, factual
conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment discrimination
statute was violated. See id. at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

Decision without a hearing

We first determine whether the AJ appropriately issued the decision without a hearing. The
Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding that there
is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision without a hearing
regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56.
                                                  6                                     2019005662

The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge determines no
genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards. Anderson v. Liberty
Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment motion, the judge is to
determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to weighing the evidence. Id. at
249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the non-moving party’s evidence and
must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of
fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett,
477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A
“material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
We carefully reviewed the record and find that it is adequately developed. To successfully oppose
a decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of record that are in dispute
or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute.

After a careful review of the record, we find that summary judgment was appropriate because there
is no genuine dispute of material fact. However, we find that the AJ erred in finding in favor of
the Agency, as the record reflects that Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment
based on his race, and liability can be imputed to the Agency as discussed below. We also note
that, although Complainant was denied the opportunity of a hearing, we have sworn testimony in
evidence resulting from the depositions taken in May 2019, and from sworn affidavits provided in
June 2019, in addition to the statements provided during the investigation.

Harassment

Harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive that it results in an alteration of
the conditions of a complainant's employment. See Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002, at 3 (Mar. 8, 1994). To establish a claim of harassment,
Complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected
to unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on the statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment had the purpose or
effect of unreasonably interfering with his work performance and/or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the
employer. See Humphrey v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01965238 (Oct. 16, 1998).

We find that Complainant belongs to a statutorily protected class based on his race, and that he
was subjected to unwelcome verbal and physical conduct due to his race. For example, W1
witnessed CW refusing to open the gate for Complainant, claiming that he did not understand
Complainant. W1 also stated that CW “constantly invades [Complainant’s] personal space,” and
when Complainant requests that CW back off, CW responds that he cannot understand
Complainant, and states that he should “learn to speak English.”
                                                 7                                      2019005662

The Commission has found that comments about a complainant’s English language proficiency
reveal a discriminatory motive. See Genny L. v. Department of Defense, EEOC Appeal No.
0120122795 (Feb. 23, 2016) (citations omitted).

Another witness (W2) stated that he saw CW invade Complainant’s personal space, on several
occasions, while stating “speak English,” even though Complainant was “being very clear.” W2
noted that he witnessed the events that occurred on April 26, May 17, June 10, June 13, and June
20, 2016. A third witness (W3) stated that he saw CW had “physically pinned” Complainant, while
yelling, “learn to speak English! What are you doing in this country? This is America – speak
English!” W3 stated that he intervened and convinced CW to leave.

In assessing whether the Complainant has set forth an actionable claim of harassment, the conduct
at issue must be viewed in the context of the totality of the circumstances, considering, inter alia,
the nature and frequency of offensive encounters and the span of time over which the encounters
occurred. See 29 C.F.R. § 1604.11(b); EEOC Policy Guidance on Current Issues of Sexual
Harassment, N-915-050, No. 137 (Mar. 19, 1990); Cobb v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Request
No. 05970077 (Mar. 13, 1997). Generally, “simple teasing, offhand comments, and isolated
incidents (unless extremely serious) will not amount to discriminatory changes in the ‘terms and
conditions of employment.” Kozak v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01A63021 (Aug. 23,
2006); Battle v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 0120083387 (Feb. 4, 2010). Such conduct
“must be both objectively and subjectively offensive, [such] that a reasonable person would find
[the work environment to be] hostile or abusive, and … that the victim in fact did perceive to be
so.” Id.

In looking at the totality of the circumstances, we find that the complained of incidents rise to the
level of a hostile work environment. Specifically, we find that CW’s repeated disparagement of
Complainant’s English-language skills, and his invasion of Complainant’s personal space,
including a time when CW “physically pinned” him, were severe and pervasive. In addition, the
record contains evidence that CW’s conduct unreasonably interfered with Complainant’s work
performance and created an intimidating, hostile, and offensive work environment. W3 noted that
CW “terrorized” Complainant, and that the “constant intervention of his coworkers was necessary
to keep [Complainant] safe and able to perform his duties.”

In the case of co-worker harassment, an agency is responsible for acts of harassment in the
workplace where the agency (or its agents) knew or should have known of the conduct, unless it
can be shown that it took immediate and appropriate corrective action. See Enforcement Guidance:
Vicarious Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors, No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999). Here,
S1 stated that learned of Complainant’s claim of a hostile work environment based on his race
after Complainant filed the instant EEO complaint. However, we find that S1 should have known
of the harassing conduct based on the repeated reports from Complainant and his coworkers.

The record shows that witnesses corroborated that Complainant immediately reported the incidents
to S1. For example, W1 stated that he was there when Complainant called S1 to report CW’s
harassment on May 17, and June 10, 2016.
                                                 8                                     2019005662

W1 stated that he heard Complainant inform S1 that CW was “making fun of his Asian heritage,”
and that CW was “harassing him still and it’s all because of his race.” Regarding the May 17, 2016
call, W1 noted that S1 responded that Complainant should “try to stay away from” CW. W2 stated
that Complainant reported many of the incidents to S1, and that Complainant stated that these
events occurred due to his race.

W3 stated that after the incident in which he intervened (when CW allegedly pinned Complainant
and yelled “Learn to speak English!”), Complainant immediately called S1 to report it “word for
word.” Another witness (W4) stated that he recalled an incident when CW lined up Chinese food
takeout containers in the breakroom, which remained for a few days. W4 stated that he personally
reported the incident to S1, stating that it was an attack on Complainant “as an Asian person.” W4
stated that he did not recall the exact date, but that it was prior to Complainant filing his formal
EEO complaint. While S1 asserted that he was not aware of Complainant’s harassment allegation
until he learned of his EEO complaint, we find that S1 should have known based on the repeated
attempts to inform him that CW’s conduct towards Complainant was racially motivated.

An agency can raise an affirmative defense when it shows that it took immediate and appropriate
corrective action. Id. What is appropriate remedial action will necessarily depend on the particular
facts of the case, such as the severity and persistence of the harassment and the effectiveness of
any initial remedial steps. See Taylor v. Dep't Of Air Force, EEOC Request No. 05920194 (July
8, 1992). In this case, the Agency 1) added a camera surveillance system; (2) detailed police
officers to patrol; (3) moved S1’s office to better supervise CW; and (4) offered to change
Complainant’s shift, which the AJ noted that Complainant rejected “without participating in the
interactive process.”

However, we find that these actions were not appropriately corrective. CES noted that CW would
“circle back” after the police left to “surprise and intimidate” Complainant, and that CW “does
this outside of the coverage areas of the security cameras.” In addition, S1 stated that when he was
in the vicinity with CW and Complainant, CW was on “his best behavior,” and it appeared that
CW simply waited for a time when there were no witnesses to his conduct.

S1 also stated that “a lot of the confrontations” occurred in the locker room, and that there were
no security cameras installed in the locker room. S1 added that the police were there “as often as
they could be,” approximately 7 or 8, out of the 10 times that they were supposed to be there; and
that while CW was well behaved “most of the time” in the presence of the police officers, CW
would occasionally raise his voice and the officers would tell him to calm down.

Regarding the offer to change Complainant’s shift, which Complainant rejected, we find that it
cannot be considered an effective remedial action because it was not voluntary. See Complainant
v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01985285 (June 28, 2001). We further note that, unlike
where there has been a request for reasonable accommodation for a disability, in the case of
harassment there is no requirement for the employee to engage in an “interactive process.” It is the
Agency’s responsibility to take immediate and appropriate corrective action to address harassing
conduct.
                                                  9                                      2019005662

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we find that Complainant established that that he was subjected to a
hostile work environment based on his race, and that the Agency’s actions to address CW’s
conduct were not appropriately corrective. Accordingly, we REVERSE the Agency’s final order
adopting the AJ’s decision without a hearing finding no discrimination, and ORDER it to take
further action, in accordance with the Order below.

                                              ORDER

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial action:

 1. Within ninety (90) of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a
    supplemental investigation with respect to Complainant’s claim of compensatory damages,
    attorney’s fees, and costs. The Agency shall allow Complainant to present evidence in
    support of his compensatory damages claim. See Carle v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC No.
    01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993). Complainant shall cooperate with the Agency in this regard. The
    Agency shall issue a final decision addressing the issues of compensatory damages,
    attorney’s fees, and costs no later than thirty (30) days after the completion of the
    investigation.

 2. Within ninety (90) days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide eight (8)
    hours of in-person or interactive EEO training for S1, S2, and AHD. The training shall
    emphasize management officials’ obligation to respond quickly and appropriately to
    employees’ complaints of unlawful harassment to ensure that similar violations do not occur.

 3. Within sixty (60) days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall consider taking
    appropriate disciplinary action against S1, S2, and AHD. If the Agency decides to take
    disciplinary action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take
    disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline. If
    S1, S2, and/or AHD has left the Agency's employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation
    of their departure date(s).

 4. The Agency shall immediately post a notice in accordance with the paragraph below.
                                                 10                                     2019005662

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Medical Center in Bedford, Massachusetts copies of the
attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced,
or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance
Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision,"
within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital
format, and it must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g).

                                  ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1016)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)),
he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the complaint.
29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The attorney
shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this
decision was issued. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance
with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999).
                                                 11                                     2019005662

If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision.
                                                  12                                      2019005662

In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days
of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission.
If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the
official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 30, 2020
Date
