              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Garret W.,1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Megan J. Brennan,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                         (Eastern Area),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002870

                                  Agency No. 1C-251-0032-18

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s final decision concerning
his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail Handler
Assistant (MHA) at the Agency’s Processing and Distribution Center (P&DC) in Charleston,
West Virginia. Report of Investigation (ROI), at 6. Complainant was hired on May 19, 2018, and
was subject to a 90-day probationary period. ROI, at 52. The Supervisor of Distribution
Operations (Caucasian) was assigned as Complainant’s first-level supervisor (S1).

On June 6, 2018, S1 issued Complainant with his 30-day Employee Evaluation and/or
Probationary Report. Id. at 75. Therein, S1 rated Complainant as unacceptable in the areas of
work quality, work quantity, dependability, and personal conduct. S1 rated Complainant
satisfactory in the areas of dependability and work relations. Id. Thereafter, on July 18, 2018, S1
presented Complainant with his 60-day Employee Evaluation and/or Probationary Report. Id. at


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                   2019002870

76. S1 rated Complainant unacceptable in each and every work area, including dependability and
work relations. Id. However, in both evaluation reports, S1 did not specifically explain why he
considered Complainant’s work performance to be at an unacceptable level.

A short time later, Complainant was issued with a Letter of Separation on July 24, 2018, before
the end of his 90-day probationary period. Id. at 79. In the Letter of Separation, S1 noted that
Complainant’s performance had been unsatisfactory, but S1 again did not specifically identify
why he considered Complainant’s to be unsatisfactory. Id.

On October 18, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (African-American) and color (black/brown)
when on July 25, 2018, he was issued a letter of separation. Following the investigation, the
Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to
request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge
(AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged.

The Agency initially found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of
discrimination based on race and color. The Agency specifically found that Complainant did not
show that he was treated differently than similarly situated individuals outside his protected
classes. In so finding, the Agency noted that two other employees (Caucasian) were also both
later fired for unsatisfactory work performance, like Complainant.2 The Agency further assumed,
without finding, that Complainant established a prima facie of discrimination, and determined
that it articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s firing. Namely, that in
Complainant’s 60-day Employee Evaluation and/or Probationary Report, he received
unacceptable ratings in work quantity, work quality, dependability, work relations, work
methods, and personal conduct. The Agency also found that Complainant did not establish that
its reasons for his firing were pretext for discrimination. The Agency observed that S1 averred
that he was unaware of Complainant’s race3 and there was no evidence of discriminatory animus.

                                     STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard

2
  Complainant does not need to rely on comparative evidence and could still establish a prima
facie case by presenting facts, which, if unexplained, draw a reasonable inference of unlawful
discrimination. See Complainant v. U.S Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120092438 (Feb. 4,
2011).
3
    The record reflects that S1 was aware of Complainant’s color. ROI, at 70.
                                                3                                     2019002870

of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Inadequate Investigative Record

Upon review, the Commission finds that the investigative record in this case is inadequate.
Therefore, the Commission cannot make a reasoned determination on the merits of the
complaint. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) and EEO MD-110, Ch. 6 § I require
agencies to develop an impartial and complete factual record. An appropriate factual record is
one that allows a reasonable factfinder to draw conclusions as to whether discrimination
occurred. Id. An investigator must be thorough. “This means identifying and obtaining all
relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome.” Id. at §V.(D).
“To ensure a balanced record, it is necessary only to exhaust those sources likely to support the
complainant and the respondent. An investigation conducted in this manner might reveal that
there is ample evidence to support the complainant's claims and no evidence to support the
agency's version of the facts, or vice versa. The best type of investigation allows for complainant
to provide rebuttal evidence with sufficient time for the investigator to address any issues raised
within the regulatory time frames.” Id.

In the instant case, S1 issued Complainant with evaluation reports and a Letter of Separation
wherein he did not specifically explain why he considered Complainant’s work performance to
be unsatisfactory. As noted above, an investigator must ensure a comprehensive, balanced, and
impartial record and exhaust those sources likely to support a complainant. Here, there is no
dispute that the investigator only obtained an affidavit from one management official in this case
(S1) and did not obtain affidavits from Complainant’s Trainer, coworkers, or any other
supervisors familiar with the specifics of Complainant’s work performance. We specially note
that Complainant cited to his Trainer and two other employees in the record who he asserts were
aware of his performance. However, the investigator declined to obtain affidavits from these
employees, feeling that their statements were not relevant to Complainant’s case. The record
therefore fails to provide the details of Complainant’s work performance and why he was rated
unacceptable in the areas of work quantity, work quality, dependability, work relations, work
methods, and personal conduct. As such, the record is devoid of evidence corroborating S1’s
assertion that Complainant’s performance was unacceptable during his 90-day probationary
period. Based on the foregoing, we find that the record before us is inadequate for us to issue a
determination on the merits of Complainant's complaint. We shall remand the complaint so that
the Agency may conduct further investigation and then reissue a new decision on the complaint.
                                               4                                   2019002870

                                       CONCLUSION

We VACATE the Agency's final decision and REMAND Complainant's complaint in
accordance with this decision and the Order herein.

                                           ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions:

   1. The Agency shall conduct a supplemental investigation to develop an accurate factual
      record regarding Complainant's termination/separation, as described in this decision. The
      Agency shall obtain all relevant evidence to address the termination claim, including, but
      not limited to:

       a. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains affidavits from Complainant’s
          Trainer, coworkers, and supervisors who specifically observed Complainant’s
          performance. The affidavits shall address Complainant’s performance in the areas of
          work quantity, work quality, dependability, work relations, work methods, and
          personal conduct.

       b. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains a supplemental affidavit from
          S1. The affidavit shall address with particularity why he believed Complainant’s
          performance was unsatisfactory in the areas of work quantity, work quality,
          dependability, work relations, work methods, and personal conduct.

       c. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains any other affidavits or
          documentation not specifically requested in this Order, and consistent with this
          opinion, which may be relevant in determining the merits of Complainant's
          complaint.

   2. The Agency shall complete its supplemental investigation and issue a new final decision
      within 60 days of the date this decision is issued. A copy of the Agency's new final
      decision must be sent to the Compliance Officer as referenced herein.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
                                                5                                     2019002870

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact
               or law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of
Federal Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for
reconsideration in which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405;
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Complainant’s request may be submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail
within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The
agency’s request must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party.
                                                 6                                      2019002870

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration
as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 20, 2020
Date
