              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Jane H., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                        Robert Wilkie,
                                          Secretary,
                                 Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019006005

                                 Hearing No. 480-2018-00300X

                              Agency No. 200P-0691-2017102975

                                           DECISION

On September 29, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 30, 2019 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. Our review is de novo. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS in PART and VACATES in PART the Agency’s final
decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Administrative
Officer, GS-0318-9, at the Agency’s Medical Center in West Los Angeles, California.

On June 2, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint wherein she claimed that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the bases of her race (African-
American), color (black), disability (back injury) and in reprisal for her prior protected EEO
activity when:


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                             2                                      2019006005

       1. In or about November 2016, Complainant was issued a “Fully Successful” evaluation
          by her Supervisor. Complainant did not agree with the rating or the language used in
          the rating;

       2. From November 2016 to July 21, 2017, Complainant was marked absent without leave
          (AWOL) on several unspecified dates by her Supervisor with regard to absences where
          management was informed and was provided a physician’s note;

       3. From February 2017 and onward, Complainant has not been allowed by management
          to make up lost work time per her approved Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
          agreements;

       4. In or about February 2016, and then again in January 2017, Complainant requested a
          reasonable accommodation which was approved on January 16, 2017, and has not been
          implemented by management;

       5. In April 2017, Complainant was relocated from her office without any assistance from
          management and initially her ergonomic desk and chair were not moved;

       6. On May 4, 2017, Complainant’s Supervisor informed Complainant that she was
          prohibited from entering her own time;

       7. On or about May 15-18, 2017, Complainant received an email from her Supervisor
          which accused Complainant of stealing time from the federal government; and

       8. On or about June 2, 2017, Complainant was informed by her Supervisor and the Acting
          Chief that a proposed meeting was canceled, and she was also informed that she was
          not entitled to have a representative. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge
(AJ). Complainant requested a hearing. The AJ subsequently remanded the complaint for a final
decision and the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The Agency determined that Complainant failed to prove that management subjected her to
discrimination as alleged. The Agency noted that Complainant did not participate in the
investigation of the instant complaint. The Agency stated that the Investigator contacted


2
   The Agency dismissed claim (1) as an independent, discrete claim pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.107(a)(2) on the grounds that Complainant failed to initiate contact with an EEO Counselor
within 45 days of the incident. However, the Agency stated that this claim would be considered
as part of Complainant’s overall hostile work environment claim. Complainant raised no
challenges to this matter; therefore, the Commission finds no basis to disturb the Agency’s
dismissal in this regard.
                                              3                                      2019006005

Complainant on at least 10 occasions via email from September to October 2017, but Complainant
providence no testimony or evidence to substantiate her claims and/or respond to the explanations
provided by Agency officials.

The Agency stated that Complainant’s Supervisor asserted that there were multiple occasions
where Complainant did not report to work and had no valid medical excuse, which resulted in the
AWOL charges. Complainant’s Supervisor further stated that neither one of Complainant’s
telework requests were approved because the facility believed it could accommodate
Complainant’s needs with alternate accommodations. With regard to when Complainant moved
workspaces, the Agency noted that Complainant’s Supervisor affirmed that a new ergonomic
assessment was performed, and equipment was provided.

The Agency determined that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination
based on disability, race, or color. In support of this determination, the Agency stated that
Complainant’s lack of participation in the investigation resulted in the record containing no
relevant comparative evidence to suggest that Complainant was treated less favorably than
similarly situated employees outside of her protected classes. The Agency determined that
Complainant also failed to provide evidence to support her claims that she was denied a reasonable
accommodation or subjected to a hostile work environment. The Agency stated that the evidence
in the record supports Complainant’s Supervisor’s testimony concerning Complainant’s
reasonable accommodation and harassment claims. The Agency determined that Complainant did
not establish that this evidence is pretext or unworthy of credence. The Agency further determined
that Complainant failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that she was subjected to
reprisal.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contends that she did not receive any of the emails referenced by the
Agency in its final decision. Complainant states that she had the same work e-mail as she had
when she worked at the West Los Angeles facility where the alleged discrimination occurred.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As an initial matter, Complainant appears to argue on appeal that she did not receive the emails
that the EEO Investigator sent her. The record indicates that they had numerous email
conversations and Complainant on several occasions indicated she was planning to be responsive
but for various reasons was unable to do so in a timely manner. We are not persuaded by
Complainant that she did not receive emails relevant to this complaint.

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

Turning to the merits of the instant complaint, the Commission notes that an agency is required to
reasonably accommodate the known limitations of a qualified individual with a disability, unless
it can show that doing so would cause an undue hardship to its operations. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2
                                               4                                       2019006005

(o) and (p); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship
under the Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance), EEOC Notice No. 915.002
(Oct. 17, 2002); Barney G. v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120120400 (Dec. 3, 2015). The
record reflects that Complainant was diagnosed with a sciatic nerve back condition. We shall
assume without explicitly finding that Complainant is an individual with a disability. There is no
dispute that Complainant was qualified to perform her job duties. Thus, we find that Complainant
was a qualified individual with a disability.

The record indicates that Complainant initially requested reasonable accommodation for her
condition in January 2016. Complainant sought a reasonable accommodation to telework two days
a week on Wednesdays and Thursdays. On May 10, 2016, the Chief of the Audiology & Speech
Pathology Service recommended approval of Complainant’s request to telework. The Chief stated
that the request would allow Complainant to perform administrative correspondence, timekeeping,
and supply ordering as needed. The Chief noted that this would benefit the employee by reducing
back strain due to daily commuting from Apple Valley; reduce stress due to physical discomfort
and anxiety caused by commuting; allow her to take pain medications that she otherwise could not
take due to her need to operate a motor vehicle; and allow her to attend appointments outside of
her tour of duty in her local area. The Chief noted that this would benefit the organization by
allowing the retention of a dedicated employee and by permitting the employee to fully concentrate
on completing the tasks assigned without being distracted by anxiety or pain caused by the
commute.

Medical documentation in support of the request was submitted in August 2016. Complainant’s
physician noted that she had severe low back pain with radiation into the legs and that the pain has
been getting worse since January 2016. The record indicates that Complainant was informed on
November 30, 2016, that her telework request had been denied by the Acting Chief of Staff. A
Human Resources Specialist stated that Complainant submitted a telework request in February
2017 seeking to work from home two days a week due to her medical issues. The Human
Resources Specialist stated that the telework request was approved by the Service, but it was
subsequently denied by executive leadership due to a lack of justification. The Human Resources
Specialist stated that Complainant then decided to submit the request as a reasonable
accommodation request.

The Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator (LRAC) stated that Complainant requested
ergonomic modifications to her work environment and a transfer to a service location closer to her
residence, with her accommodation of choice being telework. According to the LRAC, the
telework request was denied by executive leadership based on the position not being suited for
telework. The LRAC noted that the modifications to Complainant’s work environment were
approved and implemented, and Complainant obtained employment at the Agency’s facility in
Loma Linda, California. The LRAC informed Complainant on August 2, 2017, that her request
for reasonable accommodation had been administratively closed due to the change in her
employment status and work location.
                                              5                                       2019006005

Upon review of the record, including the Agency’s final decision, we find there is insufficient
information in the record from which we can make a determination concerning this claim. We
recognize that Complainant did not participate in the investigation, but the Agency has also been
deficient in its handling of this claim. We discern no explanation for the Agency’s reasoning in
its denial of Complainant’s accommodation request in 2016. With respect to the denial of the 2017
request, the LRAC stated that the telework request was forwarded to executive leadership and
ultimately denied as Complainant’s position was deemed not suitable for telework. We note that
the Chief of Staff disapproved the 2017 request after it had been approved in February 2017 by
the Acting Chief of the Audiology & Speech Pathology Service. However, there is no explanation
in the record offered by the Chief of Staff. We discern no specific analysis of why Complainant’s
job duties were not suitable for telework in a two-day a week telework format. The Agency has
not offered any specific argument or evidence explaining why it would have sustained an undue
hardship had Complainant been permitted to telework two days a week. Therefore, this claim
requires a supplemental investigation in order to clarify how the respective telework and
reasonable accommodation requests were handled and to provide a more specific and
comprehensive explanation from the relevant Agency officials concerning their decisions on these
specific requests.

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, Complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary
scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792
(1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that she was
subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference
of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima
facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802 n.13. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's
explanation is pretextual. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 120 S. Ct.
2097 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

We shall assume arguendo that Complainant set forth a prima facie case of reprisal and
discrimination under each of the alleged bases. We find that the Agency has articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions in each of these claims. With regard to claim (2),
Complainant’s Supervisor stated that Complainant missed work on multiple occasions, many of
which were not health-related absences. According to Complainant’s Supervisor, Complainant
was marked AWOL on those dates she did not report to work and failed to follow established
policies by either notifying her or providing follow-up medical documentation.

In terms of claim (3), the Acting Chief asserted that Complainant was expected to adhere to her
schedule as mutually agreed upon based upon her FMLA request. According to the Acting Chief,
Complainant’s FMLA days were Wednesday and Thursday as requested by her physician.
                                                6                                        2019006005

The Agency stated there was no mention or request for flex days as the days were based on
Complainant’s medical issues and trading days would be disruptive to the clinic’s operations.

As for claim (5), the Acting Chief asserted that additional private space was needed for direct
patient care and since Complainant was not involved in such care, her office area was moved to
allow for an additional therapy room for the speech pathologists. Complainant’s Supervisor stated
that an ergonomic assessment of the new location was requested and performed. The Supervisor
maintained that all of Complainant’s needs were accommodated during the seven-week relocation
process. According to the Supervisor, progress was communicated with Complainant and she was
told not to move any items or perform any activities that would not be appropriate based on her
back condition.

With respect to claim (6), the Acting Chief asserted that a Human Resources Specialist informed
her that Complainant should not be completing her own timecard. The Human Resources
Specialist stated that it was a general payroll rule that employees cannot enter their own time. In
terms of claim (7), Complainant’s Supervisor denied sending an email to Complainant wherein
she allegedly accused Complainant of stealing time from the government and requesting the
Audiologist to watch Complainant in terms of her whereabouts and time and attendance.

With regard to claim (8), the Acting Chief stated that she and Complainant’s Supervisor wanted
to meet with Complainant for an informal counseling about Complainant’s performance. The
Supervisor stated that Complainant would not meet without her personal representative.
According to a Human Resources Specialist, as a non-bargaining unit employee, Complainant was
not entitled to have a union representative present at the meeting.

Complainant has not presented any substantive argument on appeal as to the merits of her various
claims. Complainant also failed to complete an affidavit during the investigation of her complaint.
Upon review of her statements and the remaining evidence in the record, we discern no persuasive
argument or evidence that refutes the Agency’s stated reasons for its actions in the alleged
incidents. We find that Complainant has not established that she was subjected to disparate
treatment on the bases of her race, color, disability, or reprisal with regard to the matters at issue.

Hostile Work Environment

To establish a hostile work environment claim, Complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to a
statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal
or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on
her statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment
and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or
creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for
imputing liability. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).
                                              7                                       2019006005

In short, to prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to
conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's
position would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that
the conduct was taken because of a protected basis. Only if Complainant establishes both of those
elements, hostility and motive, will the question of Agency liability present itself.

Although we are remanding the claim concerning denial of reasonable accommodation, we find
that Complainant has failed to establish that she was subjected to a hostile work environment as to
the totality of the remaining incidents. The conduct at issue were not sufficiently severe or
pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment. Further, the incidents were not attributable to
any of Complainant’s alleged bases. Accordingly, the Commission finds that Complainant was
not subjected to a discriminatory or retaliatory hostile work environment.

                                         CONCLUSION

The Agency’s determination that no discrimination occurred is AFFIRMED with regard to claims
(1-3 and 5-8). Claim (4) is VACATED and REMANDED to the Agency for a supplemental
investigation as specified below.

                                             ORDER

Within 90 days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall complete a supplemental
investigation on Complainant’s claim concerning being denied reasonable accommodation
consistent with the requirements of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b), in EEO MD-110, Chapter 6 and
consistent with this decision. The supplemental investigation shall include, but is not limited to,
the chronology, including specific actions, involved in each request for telework and each request
for reasonable accommodation pertaining to Complainant in 2016 and 2017, ending with the
administrative closure of a reasonable accommodation request on August 2, 2017.

Complainant shall have the opportunity to review the affidavits and other evidence and submit a
rebuttal affidavit. Within 90 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall complete
the investigation and issue a new Agency decision regarding Complainant’s denial of reasonable
accommodation claim (with appeal rights to the EEOC).

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). This report must include a copy of the
acknowledgment letter to Complainant, the supplemental investigation, and the new final decision.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
                                               8                                        2019006005

which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or the
agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                                 9                                        2019006005

Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the
applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency to
continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from
the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which the
Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                10                                      2019006005

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 16, 2020
Date
