              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Belle S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                        Sonny Perdue,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of Agriculture
                                    (Farm Service Agency),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019003582

                                  Agency No. FSA-2018-00641

                                           DECISION

On May 16, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 17, 2019, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
VACATES the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination and REMANDS the complaint
for further action.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant, a Native American female,
worked as a GS-12 Public Affairs/Outreach Specialist (PA/O) at the Agency’s Farm Service
Agency (FSA) Alabama State Office in Montgomery, Alabama. She has been serving in this role
since 2016. She reported to the State Executive Director (SED), who was a political appointee.

According to the position description (PD) in the record for the PA/O Specialist, Complainant is
“responsible for knowing and supporting equal opportunity and civil rights policies; performing
assigned duties in full compliance with the letter and spirit of equal opportunity and civil rights
laws and regulations; assuring bias-free written and oral communications; respecting and valuing


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019003582

differences of other employees and clients; and, as appropriate, preparing for career advancement
opportunities.” The PD also indicated that the PA/O Specialist must be able “to plan and conduct
training sessions, seminars, conferences and informational meetings to State and County Offices
to enhance outreach efforts and to improve diversification of program applicants.” Lastly, the
Specialist must have “[k]nowledge of equal opportunity and civil rights principles, laws,
regulations, policies and precedent decisions to recognize and solve equal opportunity and civil
rights problems and to make recommendations for corrective actions” as well as “the kinds of
practices and conditions that constitute barriers to equal opportunity in order to identify barriers
and develop recommendations.”

In addition to serving as FSA’s Alabama PA/O Specialist, Complainant also holds the positions of
State Appeals Coordinator (SAC), EEO/Civil Rights Specialist, FOIA/Privacy Act Specialist,
Special Emphasis Program Manager, and Communications Coordinator (CC). As the SAC,
Complainant stated that she was responsible for assigning appeal cases to FSA employees and
designating an FSA employee as the FSA representative for an appeal case. Complainant added
that she also is supposed to assist the employee that was assigned the case in the assembling and
preparation of the case files and that she was to keep the appeal files in her office under lock and
key.

According to the record, in January 2017, the then SED retired and the SED position was filled on
a rotating Acting basis. In December 2017, the new GS-15 SED, a Caucasian male, became
Complainant’s first and second level supervisor. Complainant named the SED as the Responsible
Management Official (RMO) in her complaint. RMO stated that he has been with the Agency 31
years and 2 months. He said that his first- and second-line supervisor is the USDA Secretary.

RMO noted that he is aware of Complainant’s race and sex. According to the Agency’s Workforce
Profile in the record and RMO’s affidavit, RMO’s 7-employee team was all female; and 3 or 42%
were persons of color. The three non-Caucasian employees were Complainant and two Black
female Division Chiefs (the Acting Administrative Officer (Acting AO) and the Key Agricultural
Program Specialist (KAPS)). The Caucasian employees included the Administrative staff (the
Executive Secretary (ES2) and the Management Information Systems Coordinator (MISC)) and
the Division Chiefs (the Acting Chief Agricultural Program Specialist (Acting CAPS) and the
Chief Farm Loan Specialist).

On June 4, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her and subjected her to harassment on the bases of race (Native American) and sex
(female) when:

       1. On several dates between March 21 and May 1, 2018, she was denied several
       opportunities to participate in training.

       2. on April 5, 2018, her supervisor denied travel requests and stripped a portion of
       her official duties.
                                                 3                                      2019003582

       3. on several dates, she was subjected to various incidents of harassment, including
       but not limited to:

       a. on May 10, 2018, her supervisor called her on her personal telephone and
       questioned her about her government travel payment elections;

       b. on May 2, 2018, her supervisor told her she was performing at a "fully
       successful" level and did not share with her why she wasn't performing above the
       fully successful level or what improvements were needed for her to achieve an
       outstanding rating. In addition, she did not have adequate time to prepare for a job
       applicant interview when she was notified fifteen minutes before, that she would
       be serving an observer;

       c. on April 23, 2018, and other dates, her supervisor questioned and interrogated
       her use of compensatory time and travel arrangements for official government
       travel;

       d. on April 2, 2018, her supervisor prohibited her from doing her job when he
       suggested that she ignore agency policy while serving as an EEO observer during
       job applicant interviews;

       e. on March 15, 2018, she was forced to terminate a partnership she created with a
       major supermarket chain;

       f. on March 6, 2018, her supervisor scrutinized and questioned her reasoning for
       use of overnight lodging and required her to provide additional information to
       substantiate her lodging needs; and

       g. on unspecified dates, her supervisor spoke negatively to her and other minority
       employees.

Training Requests Denied

With regard to the training request denials, Complainant said RMO denied her the opportunity to
attend a Jackson, Mississippi training, an Appeals training in Alabama, NAD Appeals Training,
and a Fellowship Program Internship because of her race and sex. Specifically, Complainant
claimed that on April 5, 2018, RMO denied her the opportunity to train in the Mississippi State
Office in her role as State Appeals Coordinator (SAC). She explained that, as the SAC for all
National Appeals Division (NAD) appeals, she had asked RMO if she could attend a Loss Adjuster
training in Jackson, Mississippi when it was scheduled. She stated that when the Loss Adjusters
training in Mississippi was first conceptualized, it was going to be only for the loss adjusters, but
later it was decided that appeals coordinators should be invited to ensure that they were trained
properly in appeals. Complainant further explained that as the SAC, she couldn't possibly be
effective if she did not know what the loss adjusters should be including in their reports.
                                                  4                                      2019003582

However, Complainant said that she learned that RMO had approved the training requests of three
White employees – the Acting CAPS (White, female); the MISC (White female); and Person A
(White male). Complainant stated she asked RMO why she was denied, and he told her the
National Office only approved two individuals to attend the training. Complainant said she later
learned that other states had three individuals at the Mississippi training. She also asserted that the
MISC should not have gone instead of her since Complainant is the SAC.

Complainant said that the Acting CAPS shared at a staff meeting that the National Office was
sending an employee to Mississippi to work with the Acting CAPS and the MISC on how to
formulate NAD appeals in such a way to win most of the cases. Complainant said she considered
this another missed training opportunity to learn more about the appeals process which would have
been beneficial to her as the SAC. In his affidavit, RMO countered that the Mississippi event was
a service state training, and that he approved the Acting CAPS and the MISC to attend because the
Acting CAPS handles the loss adjuster duties and the MISC assisted her. He said that he denied
Complainant’s request because she does not work with the loss adjusters. He further noted that
only two employees were authorized to attend from Alabama.

Complainant said that RMO also denied her the opportunity to attend NAD hearings. She stated
that on May 8, 2018, she informed RMO that she wanted to attend the NAD hearings with the
judges since she was the SAC. Specifically, Complainant said she informed RMO there were
issues with the NAD Appeals and that the deficiencies caused the Agency to be perceived as
incompetent. She explained that, as the SAC, she wanted to ensure the Agency was staying on top
of everything per the Agency handbook and she believed the training would be beneficial since
the Deputy Regional Director planned to discuss what NAD looks for in reviewing the evidence
to make determinations on cases. She said that although RMO agreed there were appeal issues,
Complainant said that as of October 2018, she still had not been permitted to attend any NAD
hearings.

Next, Complainant asserted that she asked to participate in the Fellowship Program Internship.
She explained that the National Office was paying for individuals to work different programs to
develop a broad base of knowledge about FSA. Complainant explained that she applied but RMO
denied her attending the internship due to the budget. However, she said when she informed him
that the National Office was paying for an internship, RMO replied, "you are asking to do too
much." Complainant said she sent RMO an email questioning his decision, and he called a meeting
at which she informed him in the presence of the Acting AO that she felt his decision was racist
and discriminatory, and that since his appointment, he seemed to have an agenda to discredit her
and treated her unfairly and differently than others. Complainant said that RMO cut her off and
said that they were not in the office to discuss his treatment.

Complainant noted that even though RMO denied her training requests for budgetary reasons, he
authorized the Acting CAPS and the MISC to attend training in Washington, D.C. together for two
weeks. She said he also approved Person A to attend a one-week training in Colorado.
                                                5                                     2019003582

Complainant observed that when she asked to attend trainings or stay overnight, RMO would say
the budget didn’t support it; but funding was always available when her Caucasian coworkers,
namely the Acting CAPS, MISC, Person A and a Caucasian woman (Person B) made requests.

In his affidavit, RMO denied being aware that Complainant felt subjected to race and sex
discrimination with respect to her training requests. 2 However, the Acting AO confirmed that
Complainant informed RMO that she considered his denials to be discriminatory. The Acting AO
also said she handles the budget, and was aware that Complainant was excluded while others were
allowed to attend training. She noted that there was plenty of money in the budget, and that a
surplus was even returned to the National Office; hence, she was inclined to agree with
Complainant that RMO’s actions were racially discriminatory. The Acting AO added that she
believed that RMO rejected Complainant’s requests because he told her he had heard that
Complainant talked about him; therefore he could hinder Complainant in whatever she wanted to
do.

Travel Requests Denied

Under Claim 2, Complainant stated that RMO’s denial of her travel requests and removal of her
job duties was discriminatory. With respect to the travel requests, Complainant indicated that, in
January 2018, Complainant said that she inquired about exhibiting and presenting the USDA
Update session at the Tuskegee University Small Farmers Conference, one of the largest
conferences in the South that targets limited resource and historically underserved audiences. She
said RMO told her that he would think about it and let her know. Complainant said when she
informed a Tuskegee University administrator that she did not know if she had been approved to
attend the Small Farmers Conference, the university administrator contacted RMO and obtained a
verbal commitment for FSA's participation. However, on February 13, 2018, RMO informed
Complainant that the Agency would not be participating.

In February 2018, Complainant said she informed RMO that, based on partnerships she had built
with USDA Food and Nutrition Services (FNS), she was asked to co-present at a national event in
Cincinnati, Ohio to encourage school nutritionists and farmers to work together. She explained
that this was an awesome opportunity for not just Alabama farmers but farmers all over the United
States. She said, generally, the event has roughly 1,200 participants. Complainant averred that the
event had been planned for months and the former SED had already approved her attendance.



2
  Complainant explained that she did not report the Mississippi training denial because during this
time the RMO did not have a permanent boss. Complainant explained that RMO’s boss would
have been the Deputy Administrator for Farm Operations (DAFO), but there were only acting
bosses on a rotation at the time and she did not recall receiving any guidance on who was Acting
at that time. Complainant asserted, however, that when the National Outreach Director was Acting
DAFO, she had two conversations with her regarding working conditions, about filing a complaint,
and she mentioned other training denials to RMO and the Acting AO.
                                                 6                                      2019003582

However, when time came to make travel arrangements, RMO denied Complainant’s travel
request, stating that FSA did not have funding in the budget. Complainant said that she had to tell
FNS that she would not able to attend due to budgetary constraints. Complainant’s co-presenter
stated that FNS would not be able to move forward with the presentation if Complainant was not
there to co-facilitate so the co-presenter contacted the Agency’s National Office Director, who
agreed to pay for all Complainant’s travel expenses from their budget. Although FSA only needed
to pay Complainant’s $200 registration fee, Complainant said that RMO still had issue with
Complainant’s participation.

That same month, Complainant said she briefed RMO about the Alabama A&M conference
scheduled for February 28-March 2, 2018, which was being funded by FSA cooperative grant
funds. She said that RMO said he would think about whether Complainant could attend. On
February 15, 2018, Complainant said she asked again to attend the Alabama A&M conference.
RMO said that he would check the budget, but preferred that local county office staff handle the
event. Complainant informed RMO that the local employee did not intend to participate because
he was retiring. Complainant said that RMO, in clear outrage, disdain, and revulsion in his voice
and tone, stated she could go to the conference but could not attend on February 28 because the
State Committee (STC) meeting would be occurring at the same time and took priority. He also
added that she would receive only one night of lodging. Complainant said she informed the
university contact about her travel restrictions, and the university contact stated that they would
adjust the schedule. Complainant noted that following the university conference, RMO questioned
why she had returned around 6:30 pm when she was on the agenda for 10:00 am. Complainant
said she explained that a room adjustment had to be made, her last presentation ended at 2:30 pm,
and she was caught in Birmingham traffic. She said RMO stated that if Alabama A&M could not
adhere to the program agenda, then FSA would not be attending future events because FSA was
not at the beck and call of Alabama A&M.

Next, Complainant recalled that RMO initially refused her request to participate in an event with
another USDA agency (NRCS) to partner in reaching out to military veterans, stating that he could
not support spending $3,000 on travel. RMO also stated that he wished individuals would stop
contacting Complainant about events and follow proper protocol by calling him first. Complainant
said she explained to RMO that NRCS contacted her because she is a military veteran and had
conducted four large, successful events in the past for military veterans. After explaining that it
was a one day event that may take place once a quarter, Complainant said that RMO shook her
Fellowship application in the air and said, "I will let you do the meeting in north Alabama (veterans
meeting) but we are going to get rid of this [the Fellowship request]".

Complainant averred that she considered RMO’s rejection of her request for an overnight stay to
conduct Accessibility Review Training (ART) review in Dothan to be discriminatory. She
explained that, on March 6, 2018, RMO entered her office, wanting to know why she needed
overnight stays in Monroeville and Dothan. She said she explained why the overnights were
needed, but RMO refused to approve an overnight stay for Dothan.
                                                  7                                     2019003582

He stated that since her normal work hours began at 7:00 am, she could travel from the office the
same day, arrive in Dothan by 9:00 am, conduct her review and start her return by 1:00 pm - 2:00
pm. He added that the budget was tight and it did not make sense for her to travel the night before
the review for an overnight stay. However, Complainant noted that on that same day, the Acting
CAPS and MISC, two White women, left the office after their normal working hours, for which
they received compensatory time, to travel to Dothan and stay overnight because they had a NAD
Appeal hearing the next day at 9:30 am. Complainant observed that their work hours started at
7:00 am just like hers; yet RMO did not direct them to travel to Dothan the day of their hearing
because the budget was tight. In fact, she said that RMO authorized them to spend the two nights
in Dothan as well since they had another hearing on March 8, 2018 at 10:30 am.

Complainant also recounted that even though RMO approved her to travel to North Alabama to
write a success story on a farmer, he initially declined her request to spend the night and return the
following day since she would not be finished at the farm until 5:00 pm. She said RMO asked
why she could not travel back the same day. She explained that she would have worked over 12
hours, and would have to travel 4 hours to return. Complainant said that on receipt of her response,
the RMO came into her office yelling that the budget couldn't support him paying her $200 for
meals and incidental expenses (M&IE). She said that he eventually conceded to allowing her to
stay overnight when she asked him to send her an email indicating that the Agency would be
responsible if she had an accident due to the extreme working hours.

Complainant said she believed RMO’s denial of her travel requests were discriminatory because
two or three weeks after he cited budgetary concerns regarding her North Alabama trip, RMO and
two Caucasian staffers in the PA/Compliance Division, Persons A and B, left the office around
12:00 pm for a training scheduled for the next day in Cullman, Alabama, and stayed overnight at
a location that was roughly 2.5 hours from the office. Complainant noted that the RMO approved
overnight lodging and M&IE for two nights for all three of them, despite that they could have
driven up the same day of training, which began at 9:30 am and ended around 1:00 pm.

RMO averred that he only denied lodging when the destination was close by and could be driven
the next morning in an hour or half an hour. However, the Acting AO stated she is aware of
Complainant's being denied travel while there was money in the budget. She also asserted that
Caucasian employees were treated more fairly than Complainant. The FSA’s National Director of
Outreach, a Black female located in Washington, DC, who also served as the Acting DAFO, stated
that Complainant informed her that RMO was curtailing her outreach activities. She said she
instructed Complainant to note all the activities that were denied and if the outreach goals for the
state were not met, then RMO would have to justify why the activities were denied.

Removal of Duties

Regarding the removal of her duties, Complainant stated that she has been stripped of her
communication, appeals, and EEO duties and that RMO had distributed some of them to MISC, a
Caucasian employee. Complainant asserted that RMO did not provide any reasons for minimizing
her duties and has not informed her when she will be able to resume them.
                                                 8                                      2019003582

Finally, Complainant said she believes RMO decreased her workload to justify not considering
her for an extra effort award.

With respect to her communication duties, Complainant explained that, prior to becoming the
PA/O Specialist, she had been FSA’s Executive Secretary. After she became the PA/O Specialist,
due to a hiring freeze, she had to continue as the Executive Secretary until that position was filled
and the new person trained. Consequently, the prior SED transferred her Communication
Coordinator (CC) duties to MISC to lighten Complainant’s workload. In December 2016, the
Executive Secretary (ES2) position was filled. In 2017, following the prior SED’s departure,
Complainant said that she asked the Acting SED if she would return the CC duties to Complainant
since ES2 had completed training, but the Acting SED declined to make any changes since she
was only Acting status. On January 23, 2018, Complainant said she asked RMO if the CC duties
could be returned to her. RMO said that he was in the process of reviewing jobs and collateral
duties and would get back with her. Complainant states that to date, her CC duties have not been
reinstated.

Next, regarding her appeal duties, Complainant stated that in February 2018, she expressed to
RMO her concern that MISC was preparing appeal files and attending the Appeals in various
locations in the State when Complainant, not MISC, was the State Appeals Coordinator (SAC).
Further, according to the record, an employee stated that she heard MISC calling herself the SAC,
and Complainant observed that MISC was identified as the SAC on some NAD appeal hearing
documents. Complainant also noted to RMO that the appeal files which had been kept in her office
under lock and key, now were being held in ES2’s office and not under lock and key. In response,
Complainant said that the RMO removed the appeal files from ES2 and gave them to MISC. In
his affidavit, RMO stated that Complainant is still the SAC and that he has not changed any job
descriptions. He added that the MISC assists the Acting CAPS in preparing appeals to go to the
state committee, but Complainant never had anything to do with those appeals because it was
always handled in the PA section. The KAPS, however, averred that Complainant’s duties had
been stripped because, although Complainant is the SAC, she is no longer made aware of when
there are amendments or changes in certain divisions. The KAPS said that Complainant’s race
may be why Complainant’s duties were stripped.

With respect to her EEO functions, Complainant stated that RMO instructed her to train others to
perform this function so that he would have EEO observer coverage when she is unavailable.
However, she stated that RMO has not permitted her to serve as the EEO observer each time a
hiring panel has been assembled even when she is available and that he gives her inadequate notice
leaving her insufficient time to prepare. She explained that when the certification for hiring comes
in, RMO has 10 days to review, interview, and make a hiring decision. Complainant believes that
RMO looks at her calendar and decides to conduct the interviews when he sees she is on leave or
in travel status; or he tells her the day before or the day of the interview, leaving her no time to
reschedule her day and prepare for the interviews. For example, she said that, on April 1, 2018,
RMO informed her that he had scheduled interviews for the District Director position on April 2,
2018, and wanted to know if Complainant would be at work as he needed an EEO observer.
                                                  9                                     2019003582

Complainant said she replied that she was on travel status in the afternoon of April 2, 2018, because
she had ART reviews the next day in Tuscaloosa, but since the EEO observer is her job, she would
travel to Tuscaloosa after the interviews. He stated that they needed to use compensatory time
sparingly and that she should travel during her normal working hours and train someone else to do
the interview. Additionally, she stated that after she trained ES2 to be an EEO observer, RMO had
ES2 serve as the EEO observer even when Complainant was available to perform the function.
She also noted that RMO failed to inform her about other interviews. Complainant said that she
asked RMO to communicate better, but he has not. RMO countered that Complainant was not
prevented from performing her EEO duties. He confirmed that he directed Complainant to train
ES2 to be an observer because Complainant was going to be in travel status and there were
interviews that had to be conducted.

Complainant asserted that these removed duties are part of her performance plan and that RMO’s
prevention of her performing her duties negatively impacted her performance rating and her award
eligibility. She explained that FSA had funding for spot and extra effort awards, but RMO did not
submit Complainant for an award at all. Complainant said she filed a FOIA request for the list of
employees that received awards and discovered that three White employees (the Acting CAPS,
MISC, and Person A) received monetary awards. Complainant believed that based on her
accomplishments, as well as large scale meetings and USDA workshops she had planned, she
could have been eligible for an award, but RMO denied her the opportunity to perform her duties.

In response, RMO opined that, as the SED, he could make program decisions, assign whom he
wanted to work on the NAD appeals, and choose who travels because it was his budget to maintain.
RMO also averred that the Appeals Coordinator is Complainant’s duty, and that it has not been
removed or given to any other individuals. He asserts he has not changed any position descriptions.
He stated that he is not aware of the communications portions of her duties, but he did not remove
them. Finally, RMO stated that with regard to Complainant’s EEO functions he knows there needs
to be an observer during interviews but if Complainant is not available, he needs to have someone
trained to be able to perform those duties. In contrast, the KAPS stated that she was aware that
Complainant’s duties were taken. She further noted that, even though Complainant is the Appeals
Coordinator, she had not been made aware of the appeals that have been filed. She stated she
believed the removal of Complainant’s duties could be based on her race.

Hostile Work Environment

In addition to her disparate treatment claims, Complainant asserted that RMO subjected her to
harassment because of her race and sex when RMO: (a) called her on her personal telephone and
questioned her about her government travel payment elections; (b) informed her that she was
performing at a "fully successful" level and did not share what improvement was needed to achieve
an outstanding rating; (c) failed to afford her adequate time to prepare for a job applicant interview
for which she would be serving an observer; (d) questioned and interrogated her use of
compensatory time and travel arrangements for official government travel; (e) prohibited her from
doing her job when he suggested that she ignore Agency policy while serving as an EEO observer
during job applicant interviews; (f) forced her to terminate a partnership she created with a major
                                                10                                    2019003582

supermarket chain; (g) scrutinized and questioned her reasoning for use of overnight lodging and
required her to provide additional information to substantiate her lodging needs; and (h) spoke
negatively to her and other minority employees.

As it relates to RMO questioning Complainant about her government travel payment elections,
Complainant explained that on her travel voucher reimbursement form, she asked to have the meals
reimbursement paid directly to her government credit card rather than being paid directly to her.
Complainant said that RMO called to harass her about having the money go to her credit card. She
said a short time later, RMO asked again about her reimbursement request for a second work travel
event even though administration had said her payment request was fine. Complainant believed
RMO’s inquiry was race-motivated because the employee who processes the travel vouchers
indicated that RMO has raised questions on multiple occasions regarding minority employees
travel vouchers, but not the Caucasian employees. In his affidavit, RMO stated that he called
Complainant about her payment election because most people do not put their meals on the travel
card, and he wanted to be sure she wanted that entire amount paid to the card and not part to her.
He added that calling her personal phone was not malicious; he just needed to contact her.

With respect to her “fully successful” performance rating, Complainant said that she had always
gotten outstanding reviews and thus believed her current rating was unjustified. Complainant
stated in her affidavit that on May 2, 2018, RMO walked into her office, indicated he would be in
travel status, mentioned that she was performing at fully successful level, and left. Complainant
said the entire briefing lasted less than 15 seconds, and she refused to sign the midterm
performance rating. Complainant said that since there was no permanent DAFO in place, she
reported the low rating to the Acting DAFO in the National Office, the Acting AO, and others. She
added that as a result of the lower rating, she was not considered for any monetary spot awards
that were announced in the Spring and paid to individuals in August 2018. However, she said that
records showed that the Caucasian employees received more monetary awards than minority
employees, and that MISC and the Acting CAPS received more than $2,000 each. In response,
RMO stated that he conducted the mid years in a hurry because he was going on travel. He said
he told Complainant she was performing at fully successful and did not know he had to explain
what she needed to do to get a higher rating. RMO added that even though Complainant’s other
supervisors rated her Outstanding, he had only supervised her for 3.5 months and had his own
opinion on what is outstanding or superior. Finally, RMO noted that he did not go into any great
detail with any other employees either. The Acting AO and the KAPS, both women of color,
attested that RMO informed them of their performance ratings in the same manner as he did
Complainant -- no formal sit down, no goals discussed, no conversation to elaborate or ask
questions, and no explanation give or steps to improve. The Acting AO asserted that she believed
Complainant’s race and sex played a role in this issue, but KAPS said that she did not know if race
or sex played a role since she was given the same treatment and is a different race from
Complainant. 3



3
  Complainant said on October 12, 2018, RMO asked and she explained why she deserved an
“outstanding” rating. Complainant said RMO replied that she would get an outstanding but that
                                                11                                    2019003582

Complainant stated that RMO harassed her by failing to afford her adequate time to prepare for
job applicant interviews for which she would be serving an observer. Specifically, Complainant
stated that she holds all three job titles for persons who act as observers. She explained that RMO
generally has 10 calendar days to conduct interviews and that when RMO contacts the panel
members to schedule the interviews, he should contact her as well since he has access to her
calendar in the Time & Attendance system and can see if she has preplanned leave. Instead,
Complainant stated, RMO has planned the interviews, not informed Complainant when they were
going to be conducted, and provided her notice that she needed to be an observer the day, a few
hours and even 15 minutes before the interview were conducted. Complainant noted that RMO
never gives a reason for the late notice except to say, “I forgot we have interviews today; can you
be the observer." She added that on May 1, 2018, she learned from the Acting CAPS, who was
serving on the panel, that three interviews for the Agricultural Program Specialist position would
be held on May 2 at 10 am and RMO had not informed her about them. The next day, Complainant
asked the ES who was the EEO observer for the interviews and ES said that RMO had told her
that Complainant was the EEO observer. The Acting AO arrived and asked if Complainant was
ready for interviews as the EEO observer. Complainant said she was not because neither RMO
nor Human Resources had informed her about the interviews. Complainant said because she was
free, she participated in the interviews. However, on May 3, she had an informal conversation
with the Acting AO about her frustration with RMO’s disparate treatment. Complainant said that
the Acting AO told her she was not the only one because she had heard lots of complaints from
minority staff members on similar issues.

Complainant also recalled that RMO did not provide advance notice about the interviews for the
Farm Loan Manager position in Lawrence County on Friday, April 27, 2018, which she learned
about from the Chief Farm Loan Specialist. Complainant stated that these interviews were glaring
examples of RMO’s decision to ostracize her and prohibit her from effectively doing her job. She
also stated there have been occasions that she was not provided the questions to review to ensure
they were in line with regulation. Complainant stated that with adequate notification about the
interviews, she can adjust her work schedule to be available, review interview questions to ensure
they satisfy HR requirements, alert HR or the panelist if a question needs to be replaced or
amended, and conduct a 10 minute briefing of the interview committee to confirm they stick to the
script and comply with the “do's and do not's” while interviewing. RMO admitted that he may
have been wrong in giving Complainant such short notice but he needed an EEO person to observe
the interviews and he did not know all the rules on how much advance notice to give. He said that
Complainant did not indicate that she considered his short notice discriminatory.

Regarding use of compensatory time, Complainant recounted that on February 7, 2018, she was
invited to present at a mushroom workshop on February 24, 2018. However, on February 8, 2018,
she said that RMO told her that compensatory time had to be used sparingly and that she could not
get compensatory time for attending the event. Complainant also recalled that RMO denied her
request for compensatory time on April 23 for a Cincinnati trip.


the evaluation wasn’t written yet. At the time of her affidavit, Complainant said that RMO had not
issued an official end of fiscal year review yet.
                                                12                                     2019003582

RMO explained that Complainant lives in Montgomery and the Montgomery airport is 30 minutes
away but she wanted extra compensatory time and travel for gas to drive to Atlanta to catch a
flight, and he wasn't going to approve that. He stated that Complainant could have gotten on the
flight from Montgomery to Atlanta and then got on that direct flight to Cincinnati since there is a
flight every hour between Montgomery and Atlanta. Complainant countered that there was no
direct flights from Montgomery to Cincinnati, and she would have had to get a hotel in Atlanta the
day before flying out, resulting in even more compensatory time and more money spent on travel.

Complainant further noted that on October 10, 2018, she submitted a compensatory time request
for 2 hours and 15 minutes for the Auburn University recruiting event that took place on October
3, 2018. Complainant said that the compensatory time had been approved prior to the event, but
RMO told her that since she was on maxi flex, she could only claim credit time. Complainant said
she checked the regulations and found that both compensatory and credit time are available to
individuals on a flexible work schedule, which includes maxi flex, and credit time applies when
the individual volunteers to work beyond normal hours. Complainant explained that since the
Agency paid for the event and she was required to attend, it was not a volunteer activity and thus
she emailed RMO that the compensatory time request was proper per the Handbook. Complainant
contends that she recognizes RMO has a right to make certain that compensatory time is
appropriate but her issue is with the disparate treatment. She said she believes records will reveal
that Caucasian employees, such as the Acting CAPS and MISC, have been approved compensatory
time outside of their normal hours (very early mornings and very late at night) without having to
make requests or having their requests questioned. She said that her white coworkers brag about
receiving compensatory time all the time, but because of the stress caused by RMO, she said she
ultimately did not claim the hours of compensatory time she spent travelling to Cincinnati or
another conference. In his affidavit, RMO stated that he does not believe he denied any requests
for compensatory time. The KAPS said that RMO stressed that prior approval was needed to
obtain compensatory time, but Complainant said there were employees in another division who
bragged about obtaining compensatory time without prior approval. The Acting AO also attested
that there are a couple of Caucasian coworkers that earn compensatory time with no problem, but
others have limits.

Concerning RMO’s suggestion that she ignore Agency policy while serving as an EEO observer
during applicant interviews, Complainant stated that while she was training ES2 to be an EEO
observer in RMO’s office, Complainant explained to the ES2 that there needed to be a fair,
impartial, and diverse panel. She said she also explained that the GS level of the position being
interviewed (GS-13) for required that all the panelists be at least a paygrade GS-13. She said that
RMO interjected that the Acting AO was on the panel. Complainant said that she replied the Acting
AO was a GS-12 and could not be a panelist and suggested he use the KAPS or the Chief Farm
Loan Specialist, as they were both GS-13's and female since the Acting AO was the only female
he had scheduled to be on the hiring panel. Complainant said RMO instead replaced the Acting
AO with a male, which made the panel all-male despite that a minority, female applicant was
scheduled to be interviewed.
                                                 13                                     2019003582

Complainant stated that when she is the EEO observer, she takes into consideration the sex and
race of the panel to ensure there are males and females, as well as minorities on the panel especially
if the applicants are diverse because this approach protects the Agency if there is an inequitable
treatment or discrimination complaint. In failing to place a female on the panel, Complainant said
that RMO ignored Agency policy requiring diverse interview panels. She also recalled that in
October 2018, she served as an EEO observer during the interview process for the Agricultural
Program Specialist position, and discovered that a male was not on the panel, even though a male
was being interviewed. Complainant said that she was told the panel was diverse even though there
were no men on the panel. RMO said he did not remember who was on the panel and did not know
the panel had to be diverse based on the interviewee, but he did know that the interviewers had to
be the same grade or higher. He also denied scheduling interviews when Complainant was
unavailable and said he used the ES2 as an observer only when Complainant was out of the office.

Complainant further contended that she worked in a hostile work environment because RMO did
not allow her to execute her job functions and treated her differently from the Caucasian
employees. For example, she recounted that on February 7, 2018, she briefed RMO about some of
the issues she had seen on COC minutes and appeals letters from the county that could influence
the ruling a judge gives in a NAD decision. She told RMO that, as the SAC, she intended to
provide examples of the issues at the upcoming Civil Rights Training, but RMO told her she did
not have permission to mention these matters at the training. Instead, RMO directed her to prepare
notes on the issues and said he would brief the employees. Further, in August 2018, Complainant
stated that a new Alabama policy was issued and RMO approved it without first consulting
Complainant, despite her frequent reminders that all state level notices and policy changes should
be discussed with her.

Complainant said RMO also harassed her when he forced her to terminate a partnership she had
created with Whole Foods and the local farmers. Complainant explained that in September 2017,
she approached Whole Foods about spearheading a farmer's market with local producers to
showcase their products and Whole Foods agreed. She said all Alabama local farmers were offered
an opportunity to sell their produce in the store, but in March 2018, RMO ordered her to cancel
the Whole Foods partnership because FSA's job was not to help farmers find marketing
opportunities. He also stated that he believed the program was discriminatory because all farmers
could not participate. Complainant said that she explained to RMO that the National Outreach
Coordinator supported the partnership and that she engaged FSA employees to inform all Alabama
farmers about the Whole Foods opportunity. In canceling the partnership, Complainant contended
that, in addition to discriminating against her on the bases of race and sex, RMO hindered her
ability to satisfy the State Outreach plan, which indicated that two additional partnerships would
be fostered and developed in FY 2018, and impeded her eligibility for awards since her yearly
evaluation is based on customer service and outreach. She explained that the Whole Foods
partnership was one way of demonstrating her willingness to go above and beyond for Alabama
farmers, especially since Whole Foods expressed a willingness to establish similar partnerships in
all of their stores. She further noted that according to National Outreach staff, no other State
Outreach Coordinator conducted outreach with the magnitude that she did, given that the Whole
Foods partnership was the first of its kind.
                                               14                                   2019003582

Complainant asserted that she believed if the venture had been established by the CAPS or MISC,
two Caucasian female employees, RMO would not have discontinued it. RMO, however,
maintained that he stopped the program because he was scared that it would expose the Agency to
a lawsuit.

Complainant considered RMO’s scrutiny of her travel arrangements after he had approved them
to be harassment, especially his refusal to permit her to travel and stay overnight before an ART
review in Dothan because the budget was tight. She noted that on the same day RMO denied her
request, he authorized the Acting CAPS and MISC to leave the office after their normal working
hours, which were the same as Complainant’s working hours, to travel to Dothan, and stay
overnight for a NAD hearing that began at 9:30 am the next day. She noted that RMO did not
direct her Caucasian coworkers to travel to Dothan the day of the hearing because the budget was
tight. In fact, RMO authorized the Acting CAPS and MISC for two overnight stays and
compensatory time. Complainant believed RMO’s heightened scrutiny of her travel constituted
racial harassment.

Finally, Complainant asserted that RMO’s actions were race motivated because he spoke
negatively to her and other minority employees. Complainant stated that RMO yelled at her
multiple times, cursed while speaking to her and stood over her in an intimidating manner.
Complainant also recalled that RMO yelled and cussed at her when he questioned her about a
schedule involving the Agency’s national photographer. She stated that the National Office (NO)
photographer was sent to do tours of the Alabama farmers, and Complainant discussed with the
NO staff what they wanted to photograph, set up the photographer’s tour agenda, and emailed the
final agenda to everyone. She said RMO came into her office yelling and screaming at her wanting
to know who approved them to work late, who approved the agenda, and other questions.
Complainant said that she reported the matter to the Acting DAFO and the Acting AO but nothing
was done so she filed a complaint because RMO was only getting more hostile towards her.
Although RMO averred that he never cussed or yelled at Complainant, the Acting AO stated that
she was present at a meeting with Complainant where RMO’s tone was elevated and “he had to
bring himself back down.” Additionally, the Program Specialist (PS), a Black woman, confirmed
that RMO had been disrespectful towards Complainant. The PS said Complainant needed
information from everyone, but RMO yelled that she would get it when he gave it to her. The
Agriculture Program Specialist, a White female, also noted that on one occasion, she heard raised
voices while RMO was standing in the Complainant’s office.

Lastly, Complainant stated that she had witnessed RMO act hostile towards other minority
employees, but never towards the Caucasian coworkers. Complainant said that she witnessed
RMO yell at the KAPS, a Black woman, after she informed him that she wanted compensatory
time because she had worked late to complete reports to send to the national office that were due
that night. The KAPS also confirmed that RMO spoke in “loud” tones. Complainant added that
one of her minority coworkers informed her she had a hard time coming to work because of the
hostile work environment created by RMO.
                                                15                                    2019003582

Because of Race and Sex

Complainant maintains that RMO’s disparate treatment and harassment of her is because she is a
woman of color. In her affidavit, Complainant stated that RMO treats her Caucasian coworkers
more favorably than her. She also stated that RMO has made disparaging remarks in reference to
minorities in her presence. She explained that RMO referred to the Black farmers and the workers
on his farm as "the help" or "those boys" which is derogatory in the South for African Americans.

Additionally, Complainant asserted that RMO’s actions were race-motivated because she knew
his history. She noted that when the RMO was the District Director of District 2 (D2), she received
complaints about him from farmers and employees who thought they were being mistreated by
him due to race. She said the prior SED counseled RMO about them. She also averred that when
RMO was D2 Director, he did not hire a single minority employee in his district of 19 counties,
despite having hiring authority in a very racially diverse state. Complainant recounted that the
single minority, an African American woman, in RMO’s district actually had been hired by the
prior SED to be the Program Technician (PT). Complainant explained that when PT applied for
the temporary GS-5 position, RMO reviewed the applications because he could make a guess as
to the race of the applicants based on their address and community in which they lived. She said
that even though PT had a Master's degree, RMO sent the entire package of applicants back to
Human Resources and said no one met the basic qualifications, despite that a GS-5 only requires
a high school diploma. Aware of RMO’s history with minorities, the prior SED and the then
Administrative Officer reviewed the resumes, chose a few qualified individuals, and attended the
interviews to ensure a fair and impartial hiring panel. After the interviews were conducted,
Complainant said RMO indicated that he did not like any of the in-person interviewees but wanted
to conduct a second interview for the young lady who had a phone interview, because he wanted
to see her. She said the prior SED refused RMO’s request and directed him to select from the
qualified individuals they interviewed. RMO refused to hire anyone, so the prior SED hired PT.

PT averred that she too felt RMO’s actions were motivated by race. PT said she sat at a desk right
outside of RMO’s office and said she could hear the derogatory things RMO would say about her.
Complainant said that less than 2-3 weeks after she was hired, PT came into Complainant’s office
crying because of how RMO was treating her. PT said that RMO always yelled at her but not the
Caucasian employees. PT also recalled that RMO excluded her from a workshop that everyone
else was able to attend and ordered her to stay in the office to answer questions and the phones.
She said RMO told another employee regarding her that, "I don't give an F, she can sit there with
nothing to do." She said he also told a male employee that he did not care about her because he
did not want to hire her any way. PT noted that she was the only minority employee in the office
at the time. PT said that she mentioned the matter to Complainant because PT saw that
Complainant was enduring the same treatment. She added that she believed RMO treated
Complainant less favorably in comparison to Caucasians. Complainant said she reported the matter
to the prior SED, and he met with PT. Complainant said that the prior SED counseled RMO about
the hostile work environment and the perception that racism existed within the District’s
workplace. The prior SED informed RMO that the situation would not be tolerated and needed to
cease immediately.
                                                16                                    2019003582

Lastly, regarding minorities in general, Complainant noted that RMO made her cancel a long-
planned meeting that was scheduled to occur in Selma, Alabama, a predominantly African
American community. Complainant said when she asked why the meeting was cancelled, RMO
responded "we do enough in Selma." PT also recalled that an African American farmer in his 90’s
came to the office seeking an explanation about the FSA programs. She said the farmer was told
he had to figure it out on his own and that RMO said if “they want a loan it is not our job to
explain.” She noted that a Caucasian individual came in asking the same question and “they” sat
for an hour explaining the FSA programs to him. Finally, the Acting AO, a Black female, noted
that she has been subjected to race discrimination and a hostile work environment by RMO as
well. She explained that when she applied for the permanent AO position, which was announced
internally, she was the sole name on the certificate of eligibles list. However, she said RMO
directed that a White female employee, who had been her first level supervisor be added to the list
and ultimately hired, even though she was no longer with FSA and had received a letter of
reprimand.

Complainant asserts that these issues are also based on her sex because RMO has a history of
mistreating and “talking down” to females, especially women of color. She stated that RMO has
a complex about women; unless they are Caucasian. Complainant adds that this has always been
the case since she has been with the Agency.

Agency Ruling

After the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the
time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

Specifically, the Agency found that while Complainant established a prima facie case of race and
sex discrimination, she failed to prove that the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons
were pretextual. With respect to Claim 1, the Agency found that RMO explained that the two
people chosen to attend the training worked in the area related to the training, while Complainant
did not. As to Issue 2, the Agency found that RMO denied removing any duties from
Complainant's job description or denying her travel requests for lodging. With respect to
Complainant’s EEO functions, the Agency found that RMO explained that he needed someone to
be present during interviews, and if Complainant was not going to be present, he needed someone
else to perform those duties. The Agency considered RMO’s assertion that he only denied lodging
if the location is nearby or lodging is not necessary. The Agency also noted that, even though a
witness testified she was aware when Complainant was denied training and travel due to budget
despite surplus money in the budget, the witness’ testimony alone, was insufficient to support an
inference of discriminatory animus.
                                                 17                                     2019003582

Regarding Claim 3, the Agency found that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of
race or sex harassment because she failed to prove she was subjected to unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct based on her membership in a protected class. The Agency stated that
Complainant did not allege that management subjected her to personal slurs or other denigrating
or insulting verbal conduct relating to her protected classes. The Agency opined that the conduct
at issue is the type of workplace disputes, petty slights, and annoyances that Title VII was not
intended to protect against; thus, the conduct was insufficiently severe or pervasive. Additionally,
the Agency did not find that a reasonable person would find the actions complained of by
Complainant as abusive or hostile. Consequently, the Agency concluded that Complainant was not
subjected to a hostile work environment. This appeal followed.

On appeal, Complainant argues that the Agency’s decision is incomplete, biased, and lacked
comparative data regarding her disparate treatment claims and that the investigator failed to contact
or interview individuals with essential and relevant information to this case even though they were
listed as witnesses. Lastly, she asserts that neither the investigator nor the Agency provided her
the opportunity to rebut the claims of RMO or address the incomplete or incorrect information that
was listed in the Report of Investigation. The Agency filed a motion to strike Complainant’s brief
and exhibits as untimely. The Agency also filed a brief seeking affirmance of its ruling.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

Generally, claims of disparate treatment are examined under the analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, she must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978);
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13. Once Complainant has established a prima facie case,
the burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dept. of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). If the Agency
is successful, the burden reverts back to Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency’s reason(s) for its action was a pretext for discrimination.
                                                 18                                     2019003582

At all times, Complainant retains the burden of persuasion, and it is her obligation to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s
Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993); U.S. Postal Service v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 715-716
(1983).

Upon review of the record, we find the investigation was not adequate and the case must be
remanded for further investigation. The investigator failed to ask crucial follow-up questions and
failed to attempt to interview material, significant witnesses.

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires that the agency develop an impartial and
appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised in the complaint. One
purpose of an investigation is to gather facts upon which a reasonable fact finder may draw
conclusions as to whether a violation of the discrimination statutes has occurred. Id.; EEO MD-
110, at Chap. 6, § IV.B. An investigation must include “a thorough review of the circumstances
under which the alleged discrimination occurred; the treatment of members of the Complainant's
group as compared with the treatment of similarly situated employees...and any policies and/or
practices that may constitute or appear to constitute discrimination, even though they have not
been expressly cited by the complainant.” Id. at Chap. 6, § IV.C. Also, an investigator must identify
and obtain “all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome.”
Id. at Chap. 6, § VI.D; see Cyrus H. v. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No.
0120180153 (Nov. 29, 2019).

The record reveals that it was the Acting AO’s duty to handle the budget, providing her first-hand
knowledge of RMO’s alleged favorable treatment of Caucasian employees and negative treatment
of minority employees. Several witnesses corroborated the Acting AO’s view that RMO always
granted the travel, training, and compensatory time requests of the Caucasian employees and that
he heavily scrutinized similar requests of minority employees, including Complainant’s requests.
RMO himself admitted that he approved the training and travel requests of the comparator
Caucasian employees but denied Complainant’s request for budgetary reasons. We find that the
investigator should have clarified the Acting AO’s statement that she believed RMO hindered
Complainant’s job duties because RMO heard that Complainant had made a statement about RMO.
It is important to know if Complainant’s purported offending statement pertained to discriminatory
behavior by RMO. If yes, then it might indicate that RMO’s actions were motivated by
discrimination.

To assess RMO’s motivation, the investigator should have interviewed the prior SED who
Complainant claimed had to counsel RMO regarding complaints of racially hostile work
environment by minority employees and had to intervene in a hiring selection because RMO did
not want to hire a minority female employee.

With respect to RMO’s denial of Complainant training and travel requests, we find that the record
was not adequately developed on this issue because the investigator did not question RMO about
each specific travel or training request that Complainant said he rejected or attempted to impede,
especially where evidence indicates that his close location rationale for denying overnight lodging
                                                 19                                     2019003582

and travel was not consistently enforced. The investigator also did not inquire as to why RMO
had not approved Complainant for any NAD Appeals training given that it was central to her SAC
position.

We find that the investigator did not obtain any documentary evidence about the budget cycles,
which could show whether RMO’s business decision was justified at the time it was made or
whether discriminatory animus may be inferred. The investigator also did not probe as to why if
there was a budget issue, RMO approved for Caucasian employees’ overnight travel and lodging
for longer periods of time than Complainant requested, compensatory time, and meal expenses.

We find that the investigator failed to interview any of the Caucasian employees, such as Acting
CAPS and MISC, who were identified as being similarly situated to Complainant but apparently
more favorably treated on several training and travel requests. The investigator also did not obtain
any evidence relating to Person A, a White male, and Person B, a White female. The record reveals
that Persons A and B were not on RMO’s team but that he approved them for travel and training,
and that he initially approved Person A’s Mississippi training request even though the training had
been expanded to address appeals, a duty in Complainant’s domain as the SAC.

Regarding the removal or impediment of Complainant’s duties, we note that while RMO may have
accurately contended that he did not modify Complainant’s position description, we find that the
investigator failed to explore (with RMO and other witnesses) Complainant and employee
witnesses’ examples of the ways in which RMO altered or shifted Complainant’s appeal and EEO
Observer duties to Caucasian employees. The investigator also failed to explore why RMO had
not restored Complainant’s communication duties since she was the Communication Coordinator
and was no longer performing the Executive Secretary job that justified lightening her workload.
The investigator also failed to inquire as to why, if RMO only used ES2, a White female, as an
EEO observer when Complainant was unavailable, ES2 was the EEO observer on specific
occasions that Complainant cited she was free to serve. Finally, the investigator failed to ask RMO
why he continued to “forget” to or timely inform Complainant about job interviews knowing he
needed an EEO observer when he apparently always adequately and timely notified the panelists
who would be conducting the interviews.

The record also is insufficiently developed to determine whether Complainant was subjected to
harassment based on race and sex. Whether a workplace is “permeated with discriminatory
intimidation, ridicule, and insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to ... create an abusive
working environment” can be determined “only by looking at all the circumstances.” Harris v.
Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 & 23 (1993). Factors to consider in evaluating whether the
environment is hostile or abusive include: “the frequency of the conduct; its severity; whether it is
physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably
interferes with an employee's work performance.” Id. at 23.
                                                20                                    2019003582

Here, Complainant enumerated several ways in which she believed RMO’s actions unreasonably
interfered with her work performance, e.g., the low performance rating, heightened scrutiny of her
compensatory time and travel arrangements, interference with her job duties as an EEO observer,
the termination of the Whole Foods partnership, and the verbal abuse to which she was subjected.
However, the record is lacking comparative evidence such as whether RMO gave an Outstanding
performance rating to any of the Caucasian employees on his team or abruptly informed them of
their midyear ratings; whether he ever scrutinized or denied their travel, compensatory time, and
lodging requests or raised budgetary concerns; and whether RMO yelled at or berated them.
Additionally, as to the cancellation of the Whole Foods partnership, the investigation does not
reveal whether RMO terminated any other employees’ large-scale projects or just Complainant’s
events. This comparative information would enable the factfinder to determine whether RMO
consistently enforced workplace standards.

For the aforementioned reasons, the Commission finds that a supplemental investigation is needed
to obtain additional information regarding the alleged disparate treatment and harassment of
Complainant. We note that critical to the investigation is information about the Caucasian
comparators, specifically RMO’s training and travel justifications for, performance ratings of, and
behavioral interactions with them, specifically, and White employees and farmers, generally. We
also consider important the collection of objective, documentary evidence regarding the budget,
diverse interview panels, travel, compensatory time, and lodging policies to be part of an adequate
investigation. Because we find many claims need more investigation, we find that all claims should
be ultimately adjudicated together and we make no ultimate finding in this decision regarding
discrimination on any claims in the complaint.

                                         CONCLUSION

We VACATE the Agency's final decision finding no discrimination and REMAND the matter to
the Agency for further processing in accordance with this decision and the ORDER herein.

                                             ORDER

Within 90 days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall complete a supplemental
investigation, obtaining detailed affidavits and relevant documentary evidence, on Complainant's
discrimination and harassment claims and issue a new final decision on all the claims in
Complainant’s complaint. The supplemental investigation shall include, at a minimum, the
following:

1. Documentary evidence related to FSA’s budget between March and May 2018, including, at a
minimum, the following:

       a. FSA’s budgetary policies and the budget levels during this timeframe
                                                21                                     2019003582

       b. All travel and overnight lodging requests submitted to RMO during this time period, and
       his decisions and justifications on them (including travel hours and proximity to
       Montgomery, Alabama office)

       c. All compensatory time requests and RMO’s decisions on them, including follow-up
       inquiries by him during this time period.

2. Investigative affidavits or other sworn/affirmed statements from Caucasian employees
identified by Complainant as being favorably treated or receiving her job duties in her affidavit
and rebuttal. The EEO investigator shall ask these witnesses to provide their job titles and duties,
describe their organizational relationship to RMO and Complainant, why they qualified for the
training and travel they requested, whether they were ever denied a request for training, travel, or
compensatory time or forced to modify their requests because of the budget, and why they needed
overnight lodging or meal expenses. They also shall be questioned as to whether RMO ever yelled
at them, treated them in a hostile manner, changed or transferred their job duties, or called them
on their personal phones. If a witness is no longer available, an explanation for the unavailability
shall be provided for the record.

       a. This group includes the Executive Secretary (ES2) and the Management Information
       Systems Coordinator (MISC) along with Division Chiefs (the Acting Chief Agricultural
       Program Specialist (Acting CAPS) and the Chief Farm Loan Specialist).

       b. This group includes PA/Compliance division employees Persons A and B. In addition
       to the above information in #2, the EEO investigator shall ask Persons A and B to provide
       information about their division, and whether they are subject to different travel,
       compensatory time, and training standards than the COC employees under RMO.

3. An affidavit from the Acting AO’s former supervisor about her knowledge of whether RMO
ignored Agency policy and prohibited Complainant from doing her job an EEO observer during
job applicant interviews.

4. An affidavit from the prior SED regarding his knowledge of RMO’s interactions with non-
Caucasian employees and any disciplinary or counseling actions RMO received regarding
discriminatory actions during RMO’s tenure at FSA.

5. Affidavits from the Acting DAFO and the Acting AO regarding what they were informed about
by Complainant regarding RMO’s alleged discriminatory actions, what action they took, and
whether they notified RMO of Complainant’s concerns.

6. An affidavit from the RMO about the NAD hearings and why Complainant had not been
afforded an opportunity to attend any given the purported deficiencies in the FSA Alabama office
and given that the training was purportedly critical to Complainant’s role as the SAC.
                                                22                                     2019003582

7. Complainant shall be provided an opportunity to review the evidence collected during the
supplemental investigation, including the investigative affidavits, and submit a rebuttal affidavit.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision.
                                                  23                                      2019003582

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for
reconsideration in which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405;
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director,
Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s
request may be submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by
certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark,
the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of
the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request
must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other
party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 24                                     2019003582

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 17, 2020
Date
