               U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                             Office of Federal Operations
                                    P.O. Box 77960
                               Washington, DC 20013



                                            Cornell S.,1
                                           Complainant,

                                                v.

                                           Chad F. Wolf,
                                         Acting Secretary,
                                Department of Homeland Security
                             (Transportation Security Administration),
                                             Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 0120181891

                     Hearing Nos. 520-2010-00320X2 and 410-2016-00242X3

                   Agency Nos. HS-TSA-01026-2014 and HS-TSA-012070-2014

                                            DECISION

On May 6, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 12, 2018, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.
                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment and discrimination based on his protected
class and in reprisal.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  This number was utilized by the Agency in its final decision regarding both Agency case
numbers.
3
    This number was utilized by the Administrative Judge.
                                                2                                     0120181891

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Transportation
Security Officer at the Hartsfield Jackson Atlanta International Airport in Atlanta, Georgia.

Agency Case Number HS-TSA-01026-2014 (Complaint 1)

On March 27, 2014, Complainant initiated EEO Counselor contact. Informal efforts to resolve his
concerns were unsuccessful. On July 14, 2014, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that
the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment and discriminated against him on the
bases of religion (Christian) and in reprisal for EEO-related activity.

On September 24, 2014, the Agency accepted the following claim for investigation: that the
Agency subjected Complainant to a hostile work environment and discriminated against him on
the bases of religion (Christian) when on March 15, 20134, Complainant was issued a Letter of
Reprimand (LOR) for Unprofessional Conduct.

The September 24, 2014 letter also procedurally dismissed Complainant’s allegations of
discrimination based on reprisal. The Agency stated that there was no evidence that demonstrated
Complainant had engaged in any prior EEO activity. Therein, the Agency dismissed the allegation
that the LOR was issued based on reprisal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1), as it failed to
state an actionable claim of reprisal.

Agency Case Number HS-TSA-012070-2014 (Complaint 2)5

On August 28, 2014, Complainant initiated EEO Counselor contact. Informal efforts to resolve his
concerns were unsuccessful. On October 22, 2014, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
that the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment and discriminated against him on the
bases of religion (Christian) and reprisal (prior EEO activity and instant complaint) for his prior
protected EEO activity in filing Complaint 1 when:

         1.      on March 15, 2013, the Supervisory Transportation Security Officer (STSO2) and
                 the Transportation Security Manager (TSM1) issued Complainant a Letter of
                 Reprimand (LOR)6;


4
  In prior Agency documentation, this was incorrectly listed as March 13, 2014. The Agency sent
a Correction and Consolidation letter dated January 12, 2015 correcting the error, and
consolidating the sole claim in Complaint 1 with the rest of Complaint 2.
5
  The Agency’s complaint tracking system reflected that Complaint 1 and Complaint 2 were
consolidated by the Agency and transmitted to the EEOC Atlanta District Office under the Agency
case number for Complaint 2.
6
    This is the same claim in Complaint 1.
                                                  3                                     0120181891

       2.      on March 15, 2013, TSM1 aggressively snatched a paper from Complainant
               containing allegations of misconduct;

       3.      on an unspecified date, the Supervisory Transportation Security Officer (STSO1)
               invited Complainant to go outside to fight;

       4.      on September 19, 2013, during a meeting with his sixth-level supervisor, the
               Deputy Federal Security Director (S6), Complainant was accused of sleeping in the
               break room. S6 also questioned Complainant about his grievance and feelings
               towards management;

       5.      on March 21, 2014, management sent Complainant to remedial Standard Operating
               Procedure (SOP) training;

       6.      on March 24, 2014, the Transportation Security Manager (TSM2) removed
               Complainant from the overtime list for two weeks;

       7.      during March 2014, and continuing, management watched Complainant via
               cameras, and had Complainant’s performance monitored and scrutinized;

       8.      on April 3, 2014, a Transportation Security Manager (TSM4) put his finger in
               Complainant’s face in a threatening and intimidating manner;

       9.      on or about April 3, 2014, the Supervisory Transportation Security Officer
               (STSO3) reported that Complainant defiantly refused to conduct a bag search;

       10.     on April 16, 20147, the Duty Transportation Security Manager (DTSM) issued
               Complainant an LOR;

       11.     on June 11, 2014, TSM3 moved Complainant from the North/South Baggage
               location to Baggage Claim F;

       12.     on July 15, 2014, management placed Complainant on Administrative Leave for 30
               days; and,

       13.     on August 15, 2014, after management sent Complainant home from work, two
               Agency investigators visited Complainant’s home.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.




7
 The final decision listed the date as April 12, 2014, but the record indicates this occurred on April
16, 2014.
                                                4                                     0120181891

On March 8, 2013, while on duty in the baggage room, the Supervisory Transportation Security
Officer (STSO2) (Baptist, prior EEO activity) observed Complainant “in a position where
[Complainant] could not effectively monitor and assist with incoming suspect bags.” The STSO2
noted that this resulted in other TSOs performing the majority of the bag searches. A confrontation
ensued. Complainant acknowledged staring directly at STSO2, but felt that STSO2 was attempting
to threaten him first. STSO2 felt that Complainant’s stare was nonverbal intimidation.

On March 14, 2013, while on-duty in the baggage room, Complainant was discussing the Roman
Catholic Church with a colleague (TSO1). Another colleague (TSO2) requested that they refrain
from discussing religion at work. Complainant continued his religious conversation with TSO1.

On March 15, 2013, STSO2 and the Transportation Security Manager (TSM1) (Baptist, prior EEO
activity) met with Complainant for a pre-decisional discussion about the March 8, 2013, and March
14, 2013, incidents. Complainant stated that he started taking notes, and TSM1 snatched the paper
from him. Complainant was issued a LOR for his unprofessional conduct. The LOR cited the
March 8, 14, and 15, 2013 events as unprofessional incidents.

On September 18, 2013, the Supervisory Transportation Security Officer (STSO3) (spiritual, prior
EEO activity) reported Complainant’s statements regarding an active shooter incident in
Washington, District of Columbia. Specifically, STSO3 was concerned with Complainant’s
statements that STSO2’s behavior might be a trigger for others to become active shooters. STSO3
stated that upon probing, Complainant stated that he was “not letting it go” in reference to the
March 15, 2013 LOR that STSO2 and TSM1 had issued him.

On September 19, 2013, during a meeting with his sixth-level supervisor, the Deputy Federal
Security Director (S6) (Christian, no prior EEO activity) Complainant was questioned about
sleeping in the break room, his grievance, and feelings towards management. S6 ultimately asked
if there was anything management could do to assist. Complainant requested the ability to sleep in
the break room.

On March 21, 2014, TSM1 observed Complainant inadequately search a bag. Upon review of the
closed-circuit television (CCTV) with STSO1, it was determined that Complainant failed to
properly search the bag. TSM1 also asked STSO3 to review the footage as well. Management
showed Complainant the CCTV footage and explained his errors. Complainant disagreed. Based
on the incident, TSM1 assigned remedial Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) training. The
Security Training Instructor (STI) stated that Complainant was technically accurate in some areas,
but was argumentative regarding procedures. Following the remedial training, Complainant
asserted that he was more cautious at checking bags, but management felt that he was working too
slowly. It was noted that Complainant was wasting time unnecessarily swabbing items like power
cords.

On March 24, 2014, Complainant inspected a box that had a “Radioactive” sticker on it.
Complainant reported the box for further inspection. Complainant alleged that STSO3 reported
him for defiantly refusing to conduct the search on March 24, 2014.
                                                  5                                      0120181891

Complainant also alleged that he was removed from the overtime list by the Transportation
Security Manager (TSM2) (Lutheran, prior EEO activity) as a result of the incident. TSM2
confirmed that she removed Complainant from the overtime list for two weeks, but could not recall
the exact reason. STSO3 denied any involvement and stated he never reported Complainant for
refusing to search a potentially radioactive item.

On April 3, 2014, while Complainant was performing non-screening duties, the Transportation
Security Manager (TSM4) (Christian, prior EEO activity) allegedly aggressively pointed his finger
in Complainant’s face. TSM4 denied the interaction.

On April 16, 2014, the Duty Transportation Security Manager (DTSM) (Jehovah’s Witness, prior
EEO activity unknown) issued Complainant a Letter of Reprimand (LOR) for failing to adequately
screen the baggage on March 21, 2014.

In May 2014, the Transportation Security Manager (TSM3) (Christian, prior EEO activity) became
the newly assigned manager for Domestic Baggage Operations in the North and South regions. In
June 2014, TSM3 learned that Complainant brought a harassment complaint against three
Supervisory Transportation Officers (STSO1, STSO2, STSO3). TSM3 became concerned about
the ability of all involved individuals to work well with each other. Believing it was best to separate
the parties to ensure safety and undue disruption, TSM3 decided to temporarily re-assign
Complainant to Baggage Claim F. TSM3 discussed the reassignment with Complainant’s fifth-
level supervisor, the Assistant Federal Security Director (S5) (Christian, no prior EEO activity).
S5 considered that Complainant had recently made potentially threatening remarks regarding
STSO2 and approved the temporary reassignment. The decision to move Complainant and not
management was because TSM1 could not move all three STSOs at once, or else she would be
short supervisory staff.

Despite his reassignment, Complainant continued to clock in at North Baggage, and then continue
to Baggage F. Complainant also openly shared his disdain for the reassignment. On July 15, 2014,
management placed Complainant on Administrative Leave for 30 days pending inquiry into
Complainant’s alleged threatening behavior toward his former supervisors, his open disdain for
the reassignment, and his continued clock-ins at North Baggage after his reassignment.
Complainant was informed that an Agency official would contact him about his return to work.
No one contacted Complainant during the 30 days regarding his return. Complainant did not
contact Agency officials either.

On August 15, 2014, after 30 days, Complainant returned, unannounced. The Agency reported this
to the Office Inspector (OI), and sent Complainant home. After management sent Complainant
home from work, two OI investigators visited Complainant’s home. Complainant informed them
that he would only speak to them with a union representative. An interview was scheduled for
August 20, 2014.
                                                6                                     0120181891

At the conclusion of the EEO investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation, and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative
Judge (AJ). Complainant filed a request for hearing before the EEOC AJ. There were two
administrative judges involved in this complaint (AJ1 and AJ2).

On May 11, 2016, AJ1 held a telephonic initial conference. Following the conference, on July 8,
2016, AJ1 issued an Order on Initial Conference, Deadlines, and Record Completion. AJ1 directed
the parties to submit proposed witness and exhibit lists by or before November 2, 2016. AJ1
informed the parties that failure to comply could result in sanctions.

On October 17, 2016, Complainant submitted a Motion for Summary Judgment. Complainant’s
Motion stated that he was subjected to a hostile work environment and discrimination since 2012.
Complainant’s Motion did not discuss any specifics regarding his complaint.

On October 24, 2016, Complainant and his Union Representative purportedly submitted a Witness
List, via electronic mail, to AJ1 and the Agency representative.

On April 17, 2017, the Agency submitted a Supplemental Motion for Summary Judgment. On
May 2, 2017, Complainant submitted an opposition to the Agency’s Supplemental Motion for
Summary Judgment.

Thereafter, the case was reassigned from AJ1 to AJ2. On January 24, 2018, AJ2 issued an Order
to Show Cause as to why Complainant’s hearing request should not be dismissed as a sanction for
failure to comply with AJ1’s July 8, 2016 Order. Specifically, AJ2 stated that while the Agency
had submitted the required documentation, Complainant had failed to supply any exhibits or a
witness list. Complainant had until February 8, 2018 to respond.

On February 8, 2018, Complainant’s then-attorney timely responded and attached a copy of the
Witness List. At no point did Complainant’s former attorney inform the Agency or AJ2 that the
Witness List was previously submitted. Instead, Complainant’s former attorney acknowledged a
delay in submission, but asserted that the “Complainant’s delay in submitting his Hearing Witness
Lists/Exhibits to the Agency did not result in any harm…”. Complainant’s attorney clearly
acknowledged that the Witness List was not timely submitted, but asserted that it did not harm the
Agency, or hinder the EEO process.

On February 12, 2018, AJ2 issued an Order of Dismissal. AJ2 found the February 8, 2018
explanation that the delayed, but supposedly unprejudicial, submission to be unpersuasive. AJ2
noted that the Agency expended time and resources preparing for the pre-hearing submissions,
while Complainant neglected to timely comply. Additionally, AJ2 determined that Complainant’s
misconduct in not timely responding delayed the proceedings, prevented the Agency from
mounting an effective defense, and compromised the integrity of the EEO process. AJ2 determined
that the extent and nature of Complainant’s non-compliance warranted sanction. Therein, AJ2
dismissed the hearing request as the least severe sanction, and remanded the complaint to the
Agency for a final Agency decision.
                                                  7                                      0120181891

On March 2, 2018, Complainant emailed AJ2 and requested that his hearing request be reinstated.
Complainant asserted that his now former attorney failed to properly address AJ2’s request for an
explanation regarding the witness list and exhibits. Specifically, Complainant stated that he had
previously informed the attorney that he had in fact timely submitted a witness list. Complainant
asserted that he emailed the Witness List to the Union Representative, who then emailed a copy to
AJ1 and the Agency Representative. Complainant noted that the Union Representative could not
provide a copy of the email because the computer system had malfunctioned around that time, and
she was not able to retrieve a copy of the email. Complainant asserted that since his complaint had
been through various Agency representatives and administrative judges, files seemed to have
disappeared through no fault of his own. Complainant requested that the hearing be reinstated, and
that he not be punished for his former attorney’s error.

On April 12, 2018, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
decision noted that the Agency had previously procedurally dismissed Complainant’s allegation
in Complaint 1 that the March 15, 2013, Letter of Reprimand (LOR) was issued in retaliation for
protected activity. The Agency stated that the dismissal was appropriate and would not address it
further. The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him
to discrimination as alleged.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contends that the Agency’s final decision was filled with erroneous,
misleading, and false information. Complainant requests that the Commission rescind the decision
and proceed to a hearing. Complainant asserts that AJ2 improperly dismissed his hearing request.
Complainant states that he was represented by an attorney at the time, and asserts that it was
ultimately the attorney’s error that caused the sanction to occur. Specifically, he had timely
submitted a Witness List, but his former attorney failed to mention that in response to AJ2’s
January 24, 2018 Order to Show Cause. Complainant asserts that he should not be punished for
his former attorney’s error. Complainant asserts that it was clearly through the changing of
administrative judges that caused his initial Witness List to be lost. Complainant reiterates that this
case ultimately stems from his unfair treatment due to his religious beliefs. In his appellate brief,
Complainant provided a list of materials facts in dispute.

The Agency responded to Complainant’s appeal in a detailed opposition brief. The Agency
maintains that its final decision is fully supported by the record, and that Complainant did not
provide any persuasive arguments on appeal to overturn its decision. The Agency brief did not
respond to Complainant’s assertion that the Union Representative had timely submitted a Witness
List to the Agency Representative or AJ1, per AJ1’s July 8, 2016 Order.
                                                 8                                      0120181891

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As a preliminary matter, we note that the Agency’s April 12, 2018 final decision stated that it was
affirming its September 24, 2014 decision to procedurally dismiss the portion of Complainant’s
claim regarding reprisal. Based on the record, we find the dismissal appropriate and will not
address it further.

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-
110), at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of
the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony
of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Sanction

The Commission’s regulations afford broad authority for the conduct of hearings by
Administrative Judges. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109 et seq.; Rountree v. Dep’t of Treasury, EEOC
Appeal No. 07A00015 (July 17, 2001). When a complainant or agency fails to comply with an
AJ’s order, an AJ may take action against the noncomplying party pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.109(f)(3), up to and including issuing a decision in favor of the opposing party. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.109(f)(3)(iv). Sanctions must be tailored in each case to appropriately address the
underlying conduct of the party being sanctioned. See Hale v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No.
01A03341 (Dec. 8, 2000). A sanction may be used to deter the noncomplying party from similar
conduct in the future, as well as to equitably remedy the opposing party. Id.

Specifically, our regulations provide that where a party, inter alia, fails to respond to an order of
an AJ, the AJ may, as appropriate, take action against the non-complying party pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.109(f)(3), i.e., an AJ may: (1) draw an adverse inference that the requested
information would have reflected unfavorably on the non-complying party; (2) consider the
requested information to be established in favor of the opposing party; (3) exclude other evidence
offered by the non-complying party; (4) issue a decision fully or partially in favor of the opposing
party; or (5) take other action deemed appropriate, e.g., payment of costs and expenses by the non-
complying party. Id.

On July 6, 2016, AJ1 issued an order requiring the parties to submit proposed witness and exhibit
lists by or before November 2, 2016. AJ1 informed the parties that failure to comply could result
in sanctions. The Agency timely submitted exhibits. When the matter was reassigned to AJ2, AJ2
issued an Order to Show Cause on January 24, 2018.
                                                9                                     0120181891

This Order to Show Cause required Complainant to explain why his hearing request should not be
dismissed as a sanction for failure to comply with AJ1’s July 8, 2016 Order. Complainant had until
February 8, 2018 to respond. Complainant’s then-attorney responded, acknowledging the delay,
but argued that it had not negatively impacted the Agency or the overall process. AJ2 was
unpersuaded by such arguments.

On February 12, 2018, AJ2 issued the Order of Dismissal. AJ2 determined that Complainant’s
misconduct in not timely responding to AJ1’s July 8, 2016 Order delayed the proceedings,
prevented the Agency from mounting an effective defense, and compromised the integrity of the
EEO process. AJ2 determined that the extent and nature of Complainant’s non-compliance
warranted sanction. Therein, AJ2 dismissed the hearing request as the least severe sanction, and
remanded the complaint to the Agency for a final Agency decision.

In his March 2, 2018 correspondence with AJ2, and his appeal, Complainant repeatedly argued
that he had in fact timely submitted documents in response to AJ1’s July 8, 2016 Order.
Complainant stated that on October 24, 2016, the Union Representative timely submitted the
Witness List, by email, to AJ1 and the Agency’s Representative.

Based on the record, we find that there is insufficient evidence to support Complainant’s assertion
that he had timely submitted the requested documentation. Given an opportunity to correct the
error that his former attorney purportedly made, Complainant failed to provide sufficient
supporting documentation. After AJ2 issued an order dismissing the hearing request as a sanction,
Complainant emailed AJ2 asserting that the former attorney made a mistake, and that he should
not be punished for it. Complainant explained that he emailed a copy of the Witness List to the
Union Representative, who then emailed the list to the Agency Representative and AJ1. However,
Complainant only supplied a Witness List that was dated October 24, 2016 as evidence of the
alleged delivery. Complainant did not provide a copy of the email from himself to the Union
Representative, nor did he provide a copy of the email that the Union Representative allegedly
sent. Complainant stated that the Union Representative was unable to provide documentation
because an alleged system malfunction that destroyed the relevant email transaction, but we find
the lack of evidence concerning. The Union Representative provided no additional information or
affidavit on appeal to bolster Complainant’s assertion that the Witness List was timely delivered,
as alleged. Aside from his assertions, Complainant has failed to provide sufficient documentation
to support his contentions. We find that the provided Witness List alone, albeit timely dated, does
not demonstrate that it was actually and timely delivered.

Considering the record, we find that AJ2’s dismissal of the hearing request, as a sanction, was
narrowly tailored to what he objectively believed were the inactions of Complainant. Based on
the information and documentation that was before AJ2, we find that AJ2’s issuance of the sanction
was not an abuse of discretion.

Additionally, even if a hearing was held, it is highly unlikely that it would have changed the
outcome of this case. The record is adequately developed, detailed, and voluminous.
                                                 10                                     0120181891

Furthermore, while Complainant has argued that there are genuine issues of material fact that are
in dispute, we have reviewed the record and determined that there are no material facts that would
potentially affect the outcome of the case if a hearing was held.

Disparate Treatment

Complainant alleges that he was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corporation v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie
case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference
of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438
U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253
(1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to
persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of
a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the factual inquiry
can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of
whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s actions were
motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Service Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711,
713-714 (1983).

Unlawful Harassment

Complainant also alleged that he was subjected to unlawful harassment. A harassment claim is
examined under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).
See also Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems. Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002
(Mar. 8, 1994). To establish this claim, a complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a
statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability.

The Supreme Court in Harris explained that an “objectively hostile or abusive work environment
[is created when] a reasonable person would find [it] hostile or abusive” and the complainant
subjectively perceives it as such. Harris, 510 U.S. at 21-22.
                                                   11                                      0120181891

Whether the harassment is sufficiently severe to trigger a violation must be determined by looking
at all the circumstances, including “the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity;
whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it
unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance.” Id. at 23.

A hostile work environment exists when the workplace is permeated with discriminatory
intimidation, ridicule, and insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the condition of the
complainant's employment. Harris, supra; Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Svcs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75,
78 (1998).

With respect to element (5) of a harassment claim, an agency is subject to vicarious liability for
harassment when it is created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority
over the employee. See Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998); Faragher v.
City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998); Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful
Harassment by Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999).

Reprisal

Complainant also alleges that the Agency retaliated against him. In accordance with the burdens
set forth in McDonnell Douglas, and Coffman v. Dep't of Veteran Affairs, EEOC Request No.
05960473 (Nov. 20, 1997), a complainant may establish a prima facie case of reprisal by showing
that: (1) he engaged in a protected activity; (2) the agency was aware of the protected activity; (3)
subsequently, he was subjected to adverse treatment by the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between
the protected activity and the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Dep't of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal
No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000).

Analysis

Regarding Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, if we assume, arguendo, that Complainant
established a prima facie case of discrimination, the Agency has articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Upon our review of the voluminous evidentiary record
which consists of numerous affidavits and exhibits, and having fully considered and analyzed the
Agency’s decision which recites and addresses each claim and identifies the evidentiary support
on which it relied for its alleged actions, we conclude that the preponderant evidence does not
establish discriminatory animus.8 In reaching this conclusion, we first find that most of




8
 The record in this case is exhaustive and details numerous incidents in support of the claims. We
will not individually address each incident of alleged discrimination. Although the claims will
not be individually addressed, all matters which Complainant raised have been considered and
viewed in the context of all bases and in the context of disparate treatment and a hostile work
environment.
                                                 12                                     0120181891

Complainant’s claims are, in essence, in support of his claim that he was treated disparately based
on his religious beliefs, and that this disparate treatment created a hostile work environment.

Agencies generally have broad discretion to carry out personnel decisions and exercise business
judgment. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admn., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996). Regarding
these adverse actions, the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions which Complainant has failed to show were pretext for discrimination. Pretext inquiry is
not concerned with bad judgment, impeccability, dislike, or a mistake. Marvin W. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120170438 (Dec. 12, 2018). The question is not whether
the agency made the best, or even a sound, business decision; it is whether the real reason is
discrimination. Mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is a pretext for
intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief, however genuine, does not
constitute evidence of pretext. The focus of pretext inquiry is whether an agency’s actions were
motivated by discriminatory animus. Further, at all times the ultimate burden of persuasion
remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency was
motivated by prohibited discrimination. Complainant has failed in this regard.

Here, the Agency provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. For example, the
Agency argued that the decision to temporarily reassign Complainant was based on legitimate
safety concerns, as well as continuance of proper baggage screening operations. The Agency
argued that the working relationships amongst several staff were contentious at best. The move
was not based on Complainant’s religion or in retaliation for protected activity, but rather based
on the Agency’s needs to maintain safety, and adequate supervisory coverage. We note that the
Agency is responsible for the safety at an international airport, and thus concerns for safety are
paramount. This may entail extra precautions for safety (such as remedial safety training,
separation of employees, monitoring of employee conduct, strict adherence to safety protocols).
Based on the record, each decision served a legitimate, nondiscriminatory function which
Complainant failed to demonstrate was pretext for discrimination.

Lastly, we note that the discrimination statutes are not a civility code. What is prohibited is
“behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim’s employment.” Oncale,
523 U.S. at 81. We are mindful that the discrimination statutes do not create a right to work in a
pleasant environment, merely one that is free from discrimination. As a result, employees may
experience unprofessional, inappropriate, and disrespectful treatment. In the instant matter, the
record demonstrates that Complainant had a contentious relationship with several of his colleagues
and superiors. While daily interactions appeared at times tense, there is no evidence that any of the
actions would be, objectively, severe or pervasive enough to create a hostile work environment
based on Complainant’s protected classes.

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding that it did not
discriminate against Complainant as alleged.
                                                  13                                     0120181891

                            STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                                RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.
                                                  14                                      0120181891

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 4, 2020
Date
