              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Don F., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                        Andrew M. Saul,
                                         Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002029

                                 Agency No. ATL-18-0556-SSA

                                           DECISION

On February 28, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
February 4, 2019, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission REVERSES the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are (1) whether the Agency unreasonably delayed issuing a decision on and
failed to provide Complainant with a reasonable accommodation; (2) whether the Agency
subjected Complainant to harassment with respect to processing his reasonable accommodation
request and providing an accommodation, time and attendance, and other working conditions; and
(3) whether the Agency subjected Complainant to harassment when management denied his
request for union representation.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019002029

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Administrative Law
Judge (ALJ) at the Agency’s Office of Hearing Operations (OHO) in North Charleston, South
Carolina.

Complainant was diagnosed with stage four lung cancer on August 13, 2017. 2 Complainant stated
that following his diagnosis, he underwent over 40 chemotherapy sessions, participated in two trial
programs, and had three different types of immune therapy. He stated that on some days he could
not get out of bed, breathe, get off the toilet, or stop vomiting. Complainant stated that he was
subject to infections and received an accommodation to wear a mask when conducting hearings.
Complainant stated that the only thing that he could not do was allow himself to be exposed all
day to the public and the public workplace. Complainant stated that he made management aware
of his condition soon after his diagnosis.

On November 17, 2017, Complainant emailed the Hearing Office Chief Administrative Law Judge
(Chief ALJ) with a request to work at home by exception while being treated for lung cancer.
Complainant stated that he wished to work at home at all times during his treatment, with the
exception of the time that he conducted hearings. Complainant informed the Chief ALJ that his
doctors had agreed to allow him to conduct hearings if he wore a surgical mask at all times and
limited his time in the office to just the time necessary to conduct hearings. Complainant explained
that he had been doing so for the prior two weeks but he had been taking leave when he was not
conducting a hearing.

In a letter dated December 12, 2017, Complainant’s physician stated that Complainant was under
his care, had been seen in the office on that day, and would begin biweekly treatments with an
anticipated completion date of December 2018.

On December 15, 2017, Complainant submitted a request to work at home by exception form,
requesting to work from home from December 15, 2017 through December 15, 2018. Complainant
stated that he was not allowed to drive or travel due to lung cancer.

On January 8, 2018, the Chief ALJ informed Complainant that the Agency required confirmation
from Complainant’s physician that Complainant could hold hearings, “given [Complainant’s]
immunity issues.” Complainant responded by expressing concern about the request for additional
information from his physicians. Complainant stated that when he made his request for work at
home by exception nearly two months earlier, he was clear that his physicians had agreed to allow
him to conduct hearings under limited circumstances. Complainant told the Chief ALJ that he
believed the confirmation she needed was provided with his initial request and confirmation was
further provided by the fact that he had been taking leave and conducting hearings for over two
months.



2
    The record shows that Complainant passed away on October 25, 2018.
                                                 3                                     2019002029

On January 12, 2018, the Chief ALJ provided Complainant with notice that his work at home by
exception request had been approved for work at home on days when Complainant did not have
scheduled hearings. The Chief ALJ noted that the work at home by exception did not allow
Complainant to split his hearing days between working from the alternate duty station (ADS) and
official duty station (ODS). The Chief ALJ stated that Complainant was required to work his
entire day at the ODS or use accrued leave. She further informed Complainant that his request
was still being considered as a request for reasonable accommodation and requested that
Complainant forward a letter from his physician.

On January 29, 2018, Complainant submitted a letter from his physician and stated that he was
asking the Agency to allow him to work at home approximately eight hours per week when he was
not conducting hearings. The letter from Complainant’s physician indicated that Complainant had
a limited ability to perform his regular work responsibilities. Complainant’s physician added that
Complainant’s condition was being evaluated monthly and that treatments would continue at least
until December 2018. Complainant provided an additional letter from another physician stating
that he was being treated with immunotherapy and should not drive or travel. Complainant’s
physician further stated that Complainant should restrict his exposure to the general public and the
workplace because such exposure could compromise successful treatment during the months of
immunotherapy. Finally, the medical documentation indicated that Complainant should be
allowed to work at home in a protected environment free of environmental pollutants and
infectious diseases. Complainant ultimately worked out a plan with his physicians that allowed
him to conduct hearings if he wore a mask and left the workplace once his hearings were complete,
consistent with the plan he outlined to the Chief ALJ in his initial November 2017 request to work
at home when not conducting hearings.

On January 31, 2018, the Chief ALJ informed Complainant again that his work at home by
exception request was being considered as a reasonable accommodation request. The Chief ALJ
stated that she had forwarded all documentation to the Regional Office and the Regional Office
requested that she meet with Complainant to review the reasonable accommodation request and
the additional information that was needed. On February 1, 2018, Complainant responded that he
had submitted a response to the request for additional information and there was nothing else that
needed to be discussed.

On February 20, 2018, the Chief ALJ emailed Complainant asking when they could meet for
follow up on his reasonable accommodation request. Complainant responded that he had not heard
from the Chief ALJ in three weeks and indicated that he could be reached any time that week other
than when he had hearings.

On February 21, 2018, the Chief ALJ sent Complainant a request for additional information and
gave Complainant 30 days to submit the information.

On March 2, 2018, the Chief ALJ requested additional medical documentation from Complainant.
The request stated that while Complainant provided sufficient medical documentation to approve
his request to work at home by exception, the Agency required limited additional supporting
                                                4                                    2019002029

medical documentation for Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request to telework before
and after conducting hearings. The Chief ALJ further stated that the documentation Complainant
submitted was inconsistent with his plan to conduct hearings because his plan would not eliminate
contact with the public. Finally, the Chief ALJ offered Complainant a permanent transfer into the
position of Senior Attorney Advisor as an alternative accommodation, noting that the position
involved full-time telework. The Agency granted Complainant 10 days to decide.

On March 16, 2018, Complainant emailed the Regional Chief ALJ and copied the Regional Chief
ALJ’s superior along with the ALJs, Attorneys, and Legal Assistants in the North Charleston
Hearing Office. In his email, Complainant rejected the Senior Attorney Advisor position and
urged the Regional Chief ALJ to grant his reasonable accommodation request by the close of
business on March 21, 2018.

On March 21, 2018, the Agency approved Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request
without Complainant providing any additional medical documentation after January 2018. The
Agency stated that Complainant’s request to telework before and after his hearings had been
approved, and Complainant could flex in and out for travel or from his ODS and ADS.
Complainant was required to log in and out of WebTA in accordance with Agency timekeeping
and telework policies. The decision letter noted that the accommodation would remain in effect
for 60 days, at which time the parties would reassess and determine the effectiveness. The parties
did not indicate whether this occurred.

On July 9, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of sex (male), disability (stage four lung cancer), and age (DOB: 1951)
when:

       1.      Beginning November 17, 2017, the Agency unreasonably delayed issuing a
               decision on and failed to provide Complainant with a reasonable accommodation
               regarding his requests for telework and flexible scheduling;

       2.      Beginning November 2017, the Agency subjected Complainant to harassment with
               respect to processing his reasonable accommodation, providing an accommodation,
               time and attendance, and other working conditions; and

       3.      On April 13, 2018, management denied his request for union representation.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). On December 10, 2018, Complainant’s
representative requested a final Agency decision and objected to the report of investigation.
Complainant’s representative stated that the investigation lacked sufficient witness testimony and
a critical document, the March 2, 2018 letter from the Chief ALJ to Complainant. In accordance
with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
                                                5                                    2019002029

§ 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
him to discrimination as alleged.

In the final decision, the Agency affirmed the dismissal of claim 3 for failure to state a claim.
Specifically, the Agency determined that the claim constituted a collateral attack on the union
process when the claim arose from Complainant’s request for a union representative in response
to the Chief ALJ stopping by his office.

For claim 1, the Agency found that Complainant satisfied the elements of a prima facie case of
failure to accommodate. In doing so, the Agency determined that Complainant was disabled within
the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act due to lung cancer; was qualified to perform the duties of
his position; met his burden of proving that management was aware of his disability and on notice
of his need for an accommodation; and his disability could be accommodated. The Agency found,
however, that it took reasonable actions to accommodate Complainant. The Agency further found
that despite the Chief ALJ’s limited testimony, the record demonstrated that she expressly granted
Complainant’s request to telework before and after his hearings. The Agency added that when the
Chief ALJ learned of Complainant’s request for work at home by exception, she engaged in the
interactive process, forwarded the request to the Regional Office, and then sought clarifying
information from Complainant to process the request.

Regarding Complainant’s assertion that the Agency unduly delayed Complainant’s reasonable
accommodation, the Agency noted that Complainant requested an accommodation on November
17, 2017, which was ultimately granted on March 21, 2018. Citing brief notations from medical
providers, the Agency found that during this period, Complainant caused the delay because of the
limited information in his medical documentation. The Agency stated that it was not until February
2018, that Complainant provided detailed information as to the limitations of his conditions and
his need for an accommodation.

For claim 2, the Agency found that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of
harassment. Specifically, the Agency determined that Complainant failed to establish, by a
preponderance of the evidence, the existence of an unlawful discriminatory motive attributable to
a management official. The Agency found the record devoid of evidence that Agency officials
mentioned any of Complainant’s protected classes negatively. The Agency further found that the
alleged harassing conduct was not sufficiently severe or pervasive to create a workplace so
intolerable as to interfere with Complainant’s performance of his job duties. The Agency asserted
that the essence of Complainant’s harassment claim stemmed from the Chief ALJ’s instructions
regarding WebTA and the fact that Complainant and the Chief ALJ did not get along. Finally, the
Agency found that there was no basis to impute liability because there was no evidence in the
record that Complainant reported the alleged harassment and the Agency cannot rightly be held
liable for conduct of which it had no knowledge.
                                                  6                                      2019002029

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant’s representative contends that the decision is based upon a report that is
legally insufficient and fails to mention a critical document that reveals discriminatory actions by
the Chief ALJ. Specifically, he argues that the Agency omitted a March 2, 2018 letter from the
Chief ALJ to Complainant that evidences discriminatory acts. Complainant’s representative
further contends that the March 2, 2018 letter belies any suggestion that Complainant was not
subjected to conduct that was sufficiently severe to unreasonably interfere with Complainant’s
work environment or create a hostile work environment. Complainant’s representative asserts that
witness interviews were not conducted and that the Agency collected limited documentation. He
concludes that the omission of the March 2, 2018 letter from the Chief ALJ and the investigator’s
failure to interview witnesses are prejudicial omissions that undercut the validity of the report of
investigation. Complainant’s representative adds that the Agency’s decision erroneously attributes
much of the delay in responding to Complainant’s accommodation request to Complainant.
Complainant’s representative notes that the reasonable accommodation determination was made
four months after Complainant provided medical documentation. He maintains that the absence
of any discussion of the March 2, 2018 letter and the conclusions reached regarding the delays in
approving Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request demonstrate that the Agency
decision is not based upon substantial evidence in the record and is reversible error.

In response, the Agency contends that the appeal is moot because no party such as an Administrator
or Executor representing Complainant’s estate was substituted for Complainant, and there was no
evidence establishing that the appeal was filed by an authorized representative. The Agency argues
that Complainant’s representative provided no documentation to show that he was authorized to
proceed on behalf of Complainant or his estate and the appeal should be dismissed because it was
filed without authority.

The Agency asserts that even if a proper party with established authorization was substituted, the
final Agency decision properly concluded that Complainant failed to show that he was denied a
reasonable accommodation, or that the Agency unduly delayed responding to his request for
accommodation. The Agency notes that Complainant was allowed to work from home before and
after his hearings and allowed to work from home on any day he was not conducting hearings.
The Agency reasons that in light of evidence suggesting that Complainant should have no exposure
outside the home and should not travel, the request for additional documentation to clarify whether
he remained able to conduct hearings was understandable and reasonable. Regarding claim 2, the
Agency contends that Complainant presented no evidence of discriminatory animus and even if
the Chief ALJ made comments related to age and sex, the comments were isolated and not
sufficiently severe or pervasive. The Agency maintains that claim 3 was properly dismissed for
failure to state a claim and asserts that it was harmless error that the March 2, 2018 letter regarding
an alternative accommodation was not included in the record.
                                                7                                     2019002029

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As an initial matter, we note that we are not persuaded by the Agency’s argument that the instant
appeal is moot because no proper party, such as an Administrator or Executor representing
Complainant’s estate, was substituted for Complainant. 3 The Agency contends that there is no
evidence establishing that the appeal was filed by an authorized representative. However, the
Agency recognized Complainant’s representative as an authorized representative when issuing its
final Agency decision, and Complainant named his representative in his formal complaint.
Accordingly, we disagree with the Agency’s contention that the instant appeal is moot.

Procedural Dismissal

We find that the Agency properly dismissed claim 3 for failure to state a claim. The regulation set
forth at 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) provides, in relevant part, that an agency shall dismiss a
complaint that fails to state a claim. An agency shall accept a complaint from any aggrieved
employee or applicant for employment who believes that he or she has been discriminated against
by that agency because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disabling condition,
genetic information, or reprisal. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.103, .106(a). The Commission's federal sector
case precedent has long defined an "aggrieved employee" as one who suffers a present harm or
loss with respect to a term, condition, or privilege of employment for which there is a remedy.
Diaz v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Request No. 05931049 (Apr. 21, 1994). The Commission
has held that an employee cannot use the EEO process to lodge a collateral attack on another
proceeding. See Wills v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Request No. 05970596 (July 30, 1998); Kleinman
v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05940585 (Sept. 22, 1994); Lingad v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Request No. 05930106 (June 25, 1993). Here, Complainant asserted his collective
bargaining rights to a union representative at a management meeting. The proper forum for
Complainant to raise his claim that he was denied a union representative was within the negotiated
grievance process.


3
  The Commission has held that the estate of the deceased complainant may file a complaint if the
deceased at least obtained EEO counseling on the matter and the agency issued a Notice of Final
Interview. See Estate of James M. Benner v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 059603026
(Jan. 10, 1997).
                                                   8                                       2019002029



Reasonable Accommodation

As for the remaining claims, claims 1 and 2, we observe that while Complainant alleged that he
was subjected to harassment, evidenced by requests for additional medical documentation, time
and attendance complications, and his general working conditions, the incidents in question are
directly related to Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request. Specifically, we find that
the substance of these events was a result of the Agency’s denial and delay in providing
Complainant with the requested reasonable accommodation.

In order to establish that Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must
show that: (1) he is an individual with a disability; (2) he is a qualified individual with a disability;
and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, EEOC No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (Enforcement Guidance). “The term
‘qualified,’ with respect to an individual with a disability, means that the individual satisfies the
requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment
position such individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can
perform the essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). An agency is required to
make reasonable accommodation to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified
individual with a disability unless the Agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue
hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p).

Upon a complainant's request for reasonable accommodation, an employer may require that
documentation about the disability and the functional limitations come from an appropriate health
care or rehabilitation professional. See Enforcement Guidance at Question 6. When an employee's
disability or need for an accommodation is not known or obvious, an employer may ask an
employee for reasonable documentation about his or her disability, limitations, and
accommodation requirements. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Disability-Related Inquiries
and Medical Examinations of Employees Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Question 7
(July 27, 2000).

Here, it is undisputed that Complainant was a qualified individual with a disability. Upon review,
we find that the Agency did not immediately provide Complainant with his requested
accommodation of working at home during the times when he was not conducting hearings.
Instead, the Agency required Complainant to utilize leave and the Chief ALJ repeatedly asked
Complainant for more documentation on the basis that his request was not supported by adequate
documentation. ROI at Exhibits 12, 13, 14, and 19. In her affidavit, the Chief ALJ testified that
she did not know the reason for the Agency’s responses to Complainant’s reasonable
accommodation request aside from needing additional information. Id. at Ex. 7. The record does
not support her assertion that her role in the matter was simply communicating between
Complainant and the Regional Office. Id. Throughout the four-month delay in granting
Complainant’s requested reasonable accommodation, Complainant and the Chief ALJ copied
members of the Regional Office in their email correspondence regarding Complainant’s request.
                                               9                                    2019002029

However, the record suggests that the Regional Office largely remained silent and acquiesced in
the Chief ALJ’s decision-making. Id. at Exhibits 12, 13, 14, and 19.

On appeal, Complainant’s representative argues that the March 2, 2018 correspondence from the
Chief ALJ, which offered Complainant an alternative accommodation, was not included in the
report of investigation. However, we note that he provided the document. The Agency asserts the
document was excluded in harmless error, and it has been considered on appeal. In the March 2,
2018 correspondence, the Chief ALJ stated that the Agency required additional documentation to
address the expected duration of Complainant’s immunotherapy. However, in the same letter, the
Chief ALJ stated that Complainant had provided letters from his physicians that confirmed his
diagnosis of lung cancer and that he was undergoing immunotherapy that would continue until at
least December 2018. We find that the documentation Complainant submitted months earlier was
sufficient to substantiate his request for accommodation. We note that the Agency provides no
justification for why the documentation was sufficient for telework on non-hearing days and the
use of leave on hearing days but not the requested accommodation. Complainant’s physicians
allowed him to conduct hearings as long as he wore a mask and returned home when his hearings
were finished for the day. Prior to the Agency finally granting Complainant’s accommodation
request, Complainant conducted hearings and utilized leave for the remainder of the workday. We
note that while an employer may choose between effective accommodations, forcing an employee
to take leave when another accommodation would permit an employee to continue working is not
an effective accommodation. Denese v. Dep’t of the Treas., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141118 (Dec.
29, 2016). Therefore, the Agency was not justified in asking Complainant for additional
information.

The record simply does not indicate why the Agency continued to request medical information
from Complainant. We note that the decision to ultimately grant the request took place without
the submission of additional medical documentation after January 2018. However, the record does
reveal that once Complainant elevated the issue by addressing the Chief ALJ’s superiors directly
via an office-wide response to the alternative accommodation, the Agency granted Complainant’s
requested reasonable accommodation within days. ROI at Ex. 2. Notably, the Agency does not
argue that the requested reasonable accommodation was ineffective or caused an undue hardship
by causing a direct threat. Rather, the Agency maintained that Complainant failed to provide
requested documentation and caused delay in granting his request. Yet, Complainant never
submitted additional medical documentation after January 2018, and he certainly did not provide
additional medical documentation during the intervening period between escalating the issue and
the Agency granting his approval. The granting of Complainant’s request reflects the plausibility
of providing him with the requested accommodation at the time of the initial request. Moreover,
we find that the Agency did not prove that timely granting Complainant the requested
accommodation would have imposed an undue hardship. Accordingly, we conclude that the
Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act.

An agency is not liable for compensatory damages under the Rehabilitation Act where it has
consulted with complainant and engaged in good faith efforts to provide a reasonable
accommodation but has fallen short of what is legally required. Teshima v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
                                                10                                    2019002029

EEOC Appeal No. 01961997 (May 5, 1998). In this case, the Agency was aware that after
discussion with his physicians, Complainant could conduct hearings as long as he wore a mask
and left the workplace once his hearings were completed. As such, Complainant requested the
ability to work at home before and after conducting hearings. The Agency did not show, and at
no time did it argue, that providing Complainant with the requested accommodation would have
imposed an undue hardship or that it caused a direct threat to Complainant or others. Consequently,
we find that the Agency is liable for Complainant’s compensatory damages because it has not
shown that it acted in good faith in accommodating Complainant.

As we find that the Agency’s actions violated the Rehabilitation Act and the claims were directly
related to the denial and subsequent delay in processing Complainant’s reasonable accommodation
request, we need not further address Complainant’s claim of harassment as the remedies would be
the same.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s dismissal of claim 3. However, we
REVERSE the Agency’s finding that it did not fail to reasonably accommodate Complainant and
REMAND this matter for further processing in accordance with this decision and the ORDER
below.


                                             ORDER

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial action:

   1. The Agency, within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, shall
      restore any leave used by Complainant due to the Agency’s failure to provide him with an
      effective reasonable accommodation and pay Complainant’s estate the equivalent
      compensation owed to Complainant based upon the restored leave balance.

   2. The Agency shall conduct a supplemental investigation on compensatory damages,
      including providing Complainant’s estate with an opportunity to submit evidence of
      pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages. Thereafter, within ninety (90) calendar days of
      the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall determine the amount of compensatory
      damages to be awarded. Within thirty (30) calendar days of determining the amount of
      compensatory damages, the Agency shall pay Complainant’s estate the compensatory
      damages.

   3. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      provide eight hours of in-person or interactive training to the responsible management
      officials, the Chief ALJ and the members of the Regional Office involved in Complainant’s
      reasonable accommodation request, regarding their responsibilities with respect to
      eliminating discrimination in the federal workplace. The training must emphasize the
                                                 11                                     2019002029

       Agency’s obligations under Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act, particularly its duties
       regarding reasonable accommodation.

   4. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      consider taking disciplinary action against the responsible management officials. The
      Commission does not consider training to be disciplinary action. The Agency shall report
      its decision to the compliance officer. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it
      shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, it shall
      set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline. If any of the responsible
      management officials have left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish
      documentation of their departure date(s).

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision." The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Office of Hearing Operations in North Charleston, South
Carolina, facility copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the
Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format
by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted
for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees
are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted
to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the
Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The
report must be in digital format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                  ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1016)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)),
he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the complaint.
29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The attorney
shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this
decision was issued. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance
with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.
                                                12                                    2019002029




             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant’s estate and his representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.    The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
              law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.
                                                  13                                      2019002029

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 14                                     2019002029

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 22, 2020
Date
