             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Vickie P., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Ryan D. McCarthy,
                                          Secretary,
                                    Department of the Army,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002840

                                 Hearing No. 430-2017-00391X

                              Agency No. ARUSAR16MAY01964

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s February 13, 2019, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the
Agency’s final decision, and REMANDS the complaint for further action.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Safety and
Occupational Health Specialist at the Agency’s 80th Training Command in North Chesterfield,
Virginia. On July 14, 2016, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected her to a hostile work environment:

    1. based on her disability when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                            2                                     2019002840

       a. on May 2, 2016, after seeing the tail of Complainant's service dog, a contractor
          began screaming and then complained to coworkers that the dog cannot be in the
          building, attracting more attention to Complainant. Subsequently, soldiers barked
          at Complainant's dog, distracting him from his work;

       b. on May 2, 2016, a Sergeant First Class (SFC) told Complainant that her service dog
          was not allowed in the supply room and instructed her to remove him from the
          building;

       c. on May 3, 2016, SFC, and another soldier, asked Complainant personal questions
          regarding her service dog and her disability. SFC then stated that Complainant's
          dog was not allowed in the building, feigned a cough, and claimed that he had an
          allergy;

       d. on or around May 3, 2016, management officials contacted the Staff Judge
          Advocate's Office to discuss and research Complainant's personal medical issues;

       e. on May 4, 2016, a Captain (CPT), a Command Legal Attorney, and a Major (MAJ),
          shared Complainant's medical information with those without a direct need to
          know;

       f. on May 4, 2016, CPT regarded Complainant as having a mental illness when she
          stated in an email to MAJ that "psychological dogs are not authorized." MAJ
          responded, regarding Complainant as having a neurological disability, stating that
          her service dog is a “seizure dog”;

       g. on May 10, 2016, MAJ forwarded Complainant's medical information to personnel
          without a need to know;

       h. on June 16, 2016, during a mandatory town hall meeting, SFC made threatening
          fist gestures toward Complainant's service animal and expressed negativity about
          the service animal being in the meeting and building. As a result, others in the room
          said Complainant should be more considerate of others and their feelings, and she
          should just call into meetings and not come, especially if she is so sick;

2. based on reprisal (initiating the instant EEO complaint) when:

       a. on June 27, 2016, in an email response to Complainant, MAJ spoke negatively of
          her and disclosed information about Complainant's disability by including
          additional people on the email;

       b. on June 29, 2016, MAJ told Complainant to avoid contact with SFC and any place
          he might be, to leave a meeting that he might be in, and to walk a different path, so
          that everyone's rights were considered; and
                                                 3                                      2019002840

   3. based on disability and in reprisal for protected EEO activity, when the Chief Executive
      Officer, and other management officials, have failed to take corrective action to address
      Complainant's concerns.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge
(AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. On November 28, 2017, Complainant filed an
Unopposed Motion to Amend, requesting to include a claim that she was retaliated against, and
harassed based on her disability and in reprisal for engaging in EEO activity, when on October 14,
2017, she was issued a Letter of Reprimand. On December 14, 2017, the AJ granted Complainant’s
unopposed motion.

Complainant subsequently withdrew her hearing request, and on May 23, 2018, the AJ dismissed
Complainant’s hearing request, and ordered the Agency to issue a final decision. Consequently,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The Agency found that Complainant was not subjected to a hostile work environment based on
her disability or in reprisal for her EEO activity, because the evidence did not show that she was
subjected to sufficiently severe or pervasive conduct that would alter the conditions of employment
of a reasonable person. The Agency noted that most of the incidents were reasonable reactions of
surprised coworkers who had a legitimate fear of dogs. The Agency then determined that
management officials took immediate and appropriate remedial action by pursuing the
recommended approach to handling situations of conflicting reasonable accommodations to
accommodate all parties involved.

The Agency also found that it was appropriate for management officials to know of Complainant’s
medical condition because it directly affected her fitness to perform her essential job functions of
her military position. The Agency noted that Complainant has dual military and civilian status,
and that a condition of civilian employment was to retain her status as a military reservist. The
Agency stated that according to a Department of Defense directive, a soldier with a working dog
was classified as a “3” in their physical profile, which then requires the soldier to be “medically
boarded.” The Agency found that it was neither inappropriate, nor harassment, for a management
official to discuss Complainant’s medical diagnosis where it directly pertained to her fitness to
perform essential job functions of her military position, where continuation in her military position
was a condition of her civilian employment. The decision concluded that Complainant failed to
prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

Complainant appeals the Agency’s final decision and submitted a brief in support of her appeal.
Through her attorney, Complainant argues that the Agency erred in finding that Complainant was
not subjected to a hostile work environment based on her disability. For example, Complainant
asserts that she was harassed when she was issued a Letter of Reprimand on October 14, 2017. In
addition, Complainant argues that the Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act when management
officials improperly disclosed her medical information.
                                                  4                                     2019002840

Complainant requests that the Commission reverse the Agency’s final decision and find that the
Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act because Complainant was harassed based on her disability
and had her medical information improperly disclosed.

The Agency opposes Complainant’s appeal. Regarding the Letter of Reprimand, the Agency
argues that Complainant “adds an issue on appeal,” which was not addressed in the final decision.
The Agency asserts that the final decision correctly determined that Complainant was not subjected
to a hostile work environment, and that her medical information was disclosed to those with a need
to know. The Agency requests that the Commission affirm its final decision.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chap. 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Amending a complaint

A complainant may amend a complaint at any time prior to the conclusion of the investigation to
include issues or claims like or related to those raised in the complaint. After requesting a hearing,
a complainant may file a motion with the AJ to amend a complaint to include issues or claims like
or related to those raised in the complaint. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(d). In this case, Complainant
filed an unopposed motion to amend her complaint to include the Letter of Reprimand issued on
October 14, 2017, as a discrete claim and as part of her overall harassment allegation. The AJ
granted Complainant’s unopposed motion, prior to issuing an order dismissing Complainant’s
hearing request and remanding the complaint to the Agency to issue a final decision. However, the
Agency failed to address the Letter of Reprimand in its final decision.

On appeal, Complainant argues that she was harassed when she was issued the Letter of
Reprimand. While the Agency argues that Complainant “adds an issue on appeal,” we find that
the AJ properly added the claim during the hearing process, and that Complainant is not adding a
new claim on appeal. Further, we find that the record does not contain sufficient information on
the Letter of Reprimand, and there needs to be a supplemental investigation on the claim.
                                                5                                     2019002840

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination, and REMAND
the complaint to the Agency for further processing, in accordance with our ORDER herein.

                                            ORDER

Within 90 days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall complete a supplemental
investigation on Complainant's claim on the Letter of Reprimand and issue a new final decision
on all the claims in Complainant’s complaint.

   1. The EEO Investigator shall fully investigate Complainant's claim regarding the Letter of
      Reprimand, issued on October 14, 2017. The Agency shall ensure that the EEO Investigator
      obtains all pertinent evidence needed to address Complainant's claim including, but not
      limited to, sworn affidavits from Complainant and from responsible management officials,
      and other documentary evidence regarding the Letter of Reprimand. Complainant shall
      have the opportunity to provide a rebuttal affidavit.

   2. Once the supplemental investigation is completed, the Agency shall issue a new final
      decision, with appeal rights to the Commission's Office of Federal Operations. The
      decision will include Complainant's Letter of Reprimand as a discrete claim of
      discrimination in reprisal for protected EEO activity, in addition to including the Letter of
      Reprimand as part of Complainant’s allegation of harassment based on her disability and
      in reprisal protected EEO activity.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). This report must include a copy of the
supplemental investigation and new final agency decision.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
                                                  6                                     2019002840

The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the
Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29
C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has
the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below
entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for
enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42
U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be
terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration.
                                                   7                                      2019002840

The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 7, 2020
Date
