             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Jade R., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                       Megan J. Brennan,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                      (Great Lakes Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019000888

                                   Agency No. 4J481008718

                                          DECISION

On November 2, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 16, 2018, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency correctly determined that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination
based on age, disability, and retaliation (prior EEO activity) when:

    1. On February 28, 2018, the postmaster changed her reporting time; and
    2. From July 2017 through March 15, 2018, she was not permitted to work eight hours. 2


1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  The complaint originally contained two additional allegations which were dismissed before the
Agency’s final decision was issued. These allegations will not be addressed in this decision. For
clarification purposes, we have renumbered the above allegations from the way they were set forth
in the Agency’s final decision.
                                                  2                                     2019000888

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Full-Time City Carrier
at the Agency’s Post Office in Farmington Hills, Michigan. On April 19, 2018, Complainant filed
an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of disability
(physical), age (62), and reprisal for prior protected EEO as set forth above.

Complainant identified her disability as three heart surgeries, two kidney surgeries, and an ankle
injury. She added that she has heart and ankle restrictions, and that her disability limits her in her
personal life regarding walking, using stairs, steps, and curbs, lifting over 35 pounds, and weather
changes between 15 and 85 degrees.

Issue 1

Complainant alleged that S2, the Postmaster, changed her reporting time from 8:15 AM to 10:00
AM., contending that he told her that she was not meeting office casing time and was extending
her delivery time, so her reporting time was changed to allow for only delivery. Complainant
explained that her restrictions allowed for 4.5 hours of delivery and 1.5 hours of assistance daily.
Complainant believed that the alleged action was based on her age because S2 told her that she
should retire and enjoy her life. She believed that the action was based on her medical condition
because her medical notes were not taken into consideration; and that it was based on her prior
EEO activity because S2 had monthly meetings with S1, the Supervisor, Customer Services, the
management official who was the subject of her 2017 EEO complaint.

S2 testified that Complainant’s route required 1.25 to 1.50 hours of casing in the office, but that
she would spend three times that amount on many days. He stated that he made the decision to
change Complainant’s reporting time to maintain the productivity of her assignment, adding that
Complainant would spend 4 - 5 hours in the office preparing mail for those assigned to deliver a
portion of her route. He asserted that he discussed Complainant’s performance issues with her and
a union steward prior to changing her reporting time, but her performance did not improve.

S2 explained that the agreement with the Union permits management to change the schedule of an
employee with a non-job-related injury or illness based on the needs of the service. He added that,
by changing Complainant’s reporting time, they were able to have the route prepared for her to
deliver on her arrival at work, thereby reducing the overall hours of the assignment and improving
productivity. He asserted that Complainant’s age, medical condition, and prior EEO activity were
not considered as factors when her reporting time was changed, reiterating that it was solely based
on her work performance. He also denied telling Complainant that she should retire and enjoy her
life.
                                                 3                                     2019000888

Issue 2

Complainant alleged that S2 and S1 did not permit her to work eight hours, maintaining that her
restrictions permitted her to work eight hours; and that work was available, but she was sent home,
depriving her of a 40-hour work week. As comparators, she identified three regular carriers with
medical conditions C1, C2, 3 and C3, who, she asserted, were allowed to work eight hours.
Complainant believed that the alleged action was based on her age because S1 and S2 made
statements that she should retire; that it was based on her medical condition because she could
have performed other office functions to make up her 8-hour shift; and that was based on her prior
EEO activity because management did not comply with her medical notes.

S2 did not recall what dates Complainant was sent home early versus the dates she left voluntarily
for therapy appointments. He indicated that any date she was sent home early was in accordance
with the agreement with the Union, adding that carriers working light duty assignments due to
non-job-related injury or illness are not guaranteed an 8-hour work day or a 40-hour work week.
He stated that management is not required to invest excessive work hours into Complainant’s
assignment for her to receive eight hours. Management explained that C1 would set up her route
and give it to someone else to deliver; and that, once they received a caravan to assign to her, she
would deliver approximately half of her route. C3 had a walking limitation and handled the
Undeliverable Bulk Business Mail until he was able to walk more. He then did all curbside
deliveries on his route. The Agency noted that both C1 and C3 are employees with disabilities
and were over the age of 40. S2 reiterated that Complainant’s age, medical condition, and prior
EEO activity were not considered as factors for why she was sent home early.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing
within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency dismissed issue 2 on the grounds of untimely
EEO counselor contact. The Agency, however, addressed both issues 1 and 2 on the merits, and
concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as
alleged.
                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant maintained that her EEO counselor contact regarding issue 2 was timely. She also
pointed out alleged inaccuracies in the statements of S1 and S2. Complainant noted that S1 was
terminated from the Post Office because of her actions; and that since she was the catalyst for S1’s
termination, S2’s retaliated against her after he was not able to give S1’s job back to him. She
stated that the Agency acted in a calculated, concerted, and discriminatory manner to damage her
reputation and working conditions.



3
 Complainant only provided the first name of this individual, and management maintained that it
was unable to address Complainant’s contention regarding her without more information.
                                                 4                                     2019000888

Complainant added that even if the Agency could prove a legitimate business reason for its
conduct, which it cannot, there was pretext in that S2 was retaliating against her for coming
forward against his friend, S1, who was fired. She requested that the final decision be reversed.

The Agency did not provide a statement on appeal.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, Complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary
scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792
(1973). She must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that she was subjected to
an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference of
discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie
case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. 802 at
n. 13. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
its actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately
prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the agency’s
explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530
U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

Assuming, arguendo, Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on
disability, age, and reprisal; we find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for its actions. Regarding issue 1, S2 explained that consistent with applicable policy, he
changed Complainant’s start time because she was using an excessive number of hours to prepare
and case her mail for delivery thereby reducing productivity; and that she was on notice about her
work performance but failed to improve her productivity. With respect to issue 2, the Agency
acknowledged that there were dates when Complainant was sent home early, consistent with the
agreement with the Union, because she was not guaranteed an eight-hour workday or a forty-hour
workweek and may be sent home before the end of her tour due to a lack of work.
                                                 5                                     2019000888

To meet her ultimate burden of proving that the Agency’s actions are discriminatory, Complainant
needs to demonstrate such “weaknesses, implausibility, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or
contradictions in the [Agency’s] proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence.” Evelyn S. v. Dep’t of Labor, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120160132 (Sept. 14, 2017). We find no persuasive evidence to support
Complainant’s contentions of pretext or that discriminatory animus played a role here.
Management denied making the statements attributed to them about Complainant’s age and cited
her productivity as the reason for her changed start time; and that the decision to send her home
early was based solely on the availability of work. Employers have broad discretion to set policies
and carry out personnel decisions and should not be second-guessed by a reviewing authority
absent evidence of unlawful motivation. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
259; Vanek v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05940906 (Jan. 16, 1997).

We note the contentions raised in Complainant on appeal but find that because Complainant did
not request a hearing or avail herself of the discovery process which would have allowed for an
examination of the credibility or lack thereof of S2’s explanations, we can only evaluate the facts
based on the weight of the evidence presented to us. We therefore find that Complainant has failed
to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that discrimination occurred or that the Agency
subjected her to retaliation.
                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
               law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
                                                   6                                      2019000888

Complainant’s request may be submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail
within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The
agency’s request must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  7                                     2019000888

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 5, 2020
Date
