             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Elbert H., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                        (Pacific Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020000963

                                  Agency No. 1F-901-0204-18

                                          DECISION

Complainant timely filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s final decision
concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s
final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the record is adequately developed to allow the Commission to
determine if the Agency subjected Complainant to a hostile work environment based on sex
(male) when his coworker spread false rumors about him throughout the Agency.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail Handler at the
Agency’s Los Angeles Processing and Distribution Center (LAP&DC) in Los Angeles,
California. Report of Investigation (ROI), at 64. According to Complainant, he reported to his
first-level supervisor (S1), the Acting Lead Manager, the Lead Manager, and the Plant Manager
that his coworker (C1) had been subjecting him to a hostile work environment since March 2017.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                    2020000963

ROI at 8-11. Complainant specifically maintained that he reported to management that C1 had
been falsely telling employees throughout the Agency that he was a child molester. Id.
Complainant maintained that several employees approached him, saying that C1 had been
spreading a rumor to employees that he was a child molester. Id. Complainant asserted that C1
began to slander him after he rebuffed her sexual advances. Id.

Complainant averred that management failed to address his allegation of harassment, and
therefore C1 was continuously allowed to spread the false rumors about him. Id. Complainant
maintained that management did not conduct an investigation into the matter, and C1 was not
removed from his work unit in accordance with the Agency’s anti-harassment policy. Id.

S1 stated that Complainant presented “a PS-13 of alleged allegations to [her] in the month of
October 2018,” which she then forwarded to the Lead Manager. Id. at 116. The Lead Manager
attested that both parties were separated to address the issue. Id. at 130. However, the Lead
Manager attested that Complainant did not report to her that C1 had been spreading the rumors
about him being a child molester. Id.

Complainant also averred that he was subjected to an investigative interview on August 7, 2018,
for absences he acquired due to his Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. Id. at 8-11. Complainant
maintained that management improperly discussed his private personal information and medical
information with coworkers, including C1.

On November 16, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work environment on the basis of sex
(male) when:

       1. Since March 2017, he has been sexually harassed by a coworker and despite reporting
          the harassment to management, they have failed to take appropriate steps to
          investigate and/or end the sexual harassment;

       2. On August 7, 2018, he was subjected to an investigative interview; and

       3. On unspecified dates, management discussed his private personal and medical
          information with coworkers, including the individual he had reported had sexually
          harassed him.

Following the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing, but the
AJ denied the hearing request on that grounds that Complainant failed to provide an executed
affidavit for the record in accordance with his orders.
                                               3                                    2020000963

Specifically, on September 12, 2019, the AJ issued a Show Cause Order for Complainant to
explain why he did not provide an affidavit for ROI and ordered Complainant to provide an
executed affidavit by September 16, 2019. After Complainant did not respond to the Agency’s
Motion to Dismiss for the failure to provide the affidavit, the AJ issued an order dismissing
Complainant’s hearing request. The AJ then remanded the complaint to the Agency, and the
Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

In so finding, the Agency observed that there were no corroborating statements or evidence
supporting Complainant’s allegations of harassment by C1. The Agency noted that Complainant
and C1 lived together at or near the time of Complainant’s allegations, and Complainant did not
identify how C1 propositioned him for sex. The Agency also noted that Complainant did not
indicate when or how often C1 allegedly spread the rumor about him molesting children. The
Agency further noted that Complainant did not identify the private or medical evidence allegedly
discussed with others or the contexts in which those discussions allegedly occurred. The Agency
found that Complainant’s minimally described allegations were neither severe nor pervasive
enough to establish a hostile work environment. The Agency observed that Complainant failed to
provide an affidavit for the record as ordered by the AJ, and therefore there was not enough
information regarding Complainant’s claim of a hostile work environment. The Agency
nevertheless found that management took whatever action it could to address Complainant’s
allegations based on the minimal information available.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant states that the Agency continued to send documentation to his old
address during the EEO process even after he provided the Agency with his new updated address
in January 2019. Complainant contends that, as a result, he was not able to respond to
documentation in a timely manner during the EEO process. Complainant also attaches
documentation dated March 7, 2018, which he purportedly sent to the Acting Lead Manager, the
Lead Manager, and the Plant Manager. In the March 7, 2018, documentation Complainant wrote
as follows:

       I am making a formal complaint on mail handler [C1]. [She] has been making
       false accusations around the plant calling me a child molester. These allegations
       are totally false and unwarranted. I take total offense to these accusations for I
       have small children and could not fathom anyone violating them in such a
       manner. Many co-workers are coming up to me saying [C1] is spreading these
       rumors. . . .

Complainant also attached four notarized written statements from different coworkers,
supporting his allegations that C1 had been subjecting him to a hostile work environment by
falsely spreading rumors that he was a child molester. One of these coworkers wrote,
                                                 4                                     2020000963

       I . . . am writing a witness statement for [Complainant], that a mutual employee,
       [C1] called me and told me that [Complainant] was a child molester. I know for a
       fact she was spreading those allegations around the United States Postal Service
       where we work at LAP&DC. This has caused a hostile work environment because
       we all work together. I know for a fact that these allegations are false.

Another coworker wrote that C1 also told her that Complainant was a child molester, which were
damaging rumors spread about Complainant within the workplace.

The Agency did not respond to Complainant’s appeal.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard
of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Inadequate Investigative Record

Upon review, the Commission finds that the investigative record in this case is inadequate.
Therefore, the Commission cannot make a reasoned determination on the merits of the
complaint. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) and EEO MD-110 at Chapter 6, § I
require agencies to develop an impartial and complete factual record. An appropriate factual
record is one that allows a reasonable factfinder to draw conclusions as to whether discrimination
occurred. EEO MD-110 at Chapter 6, § I. An investigator must be thorough. “This means
identifying and obtaining all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect
the outcome.” Id. at § V.D. “To ensure a balanced record, it is necessary only to exhaust those
sources likely to support the complainant and the respondent. An investigation conducted in this
manner might reveal that there is ample evidence to support the complainant's claims and no
evidence to support the agency's version of the facts, or vice versa. The best type of investigation
allows for complainant to provide rebuttal evidence with sufficient time for the investigator to
address any issues raised within the regulatory time frames.” Id.

We initially note that the record supports Complainant’s contention on appeal that the Agency
sent documentation to his previous address, even after being provided with his new address.
                                                5                                    2020000963

The record reflects that the EEO investigator sent the request for an affidavit to Complainant’s
previous address and continued to send documentation to his previous address during the hearing
process before the AJ. For example, the Agency filed a Motion to Dismiss before the AJ on
October 4, 2019, but noted in its certificate of service that the filing was sent to Complainant’s
previous address. Yet the AJ, in his September 12, 2019, Order to Show Cause, made light of the
fact that Complainant had a new address. Moreover, after sending its Motion to Dismiss to
Complainant’s previous address, the Agency then sent its final decision to his new address.
Given the Agency’s confusion over Complainant’s correct address, we find that, in the interest of
fairness, that Complainant should be given another opportunity to submit an affidavit for the
record. 2

In addition, the Investigator only sought affidavits from management officials and did not seek
affidavits from any coworkers or other employees of the Agency. We note that, in Complainant's
appeal brief, he attaches four notarized statements from coworkers who corroborated his claims
that C1 had been subjecting him to a hostile work environment by falsely telling employees that
he was a child molester.

In addition, we note that the Lead Manager attested that Complainant did not report to her that
C1 had been accusing him of being a child molester. ROI at 130. Yet, as noted above,
Complainant attached documentation dated March 7, 2018, to his brief on appeal, which he
purportedly sent to the Acting Lead Manager, the Lead Manager, and the Plant Manager. This
attached documentation shows that Complainant complained to management that C1 had been
subjecting him to a hostile work environment by falsely spreading rumors throughout the
Agency that he was a child molester and that he wanted management to take action to stop the
harassment.

We note, moreover, that S1 stated that Complainant presented “a PS-13 of alleged allegations to
[her] in the month of October 2018,” which she then forwarded to the Lead Manager. Id. at 116.
However, the record does not contain a copy of this PS-13 form that Complainant submitted,
even though the investigator requested it from the Agency. Id. at 247. Also, the Lead Manager
only attested that Complainant and C1 were separated to address the issue. Id. at 130. The Lead
Manager provides no further detail as to how the parties were separated and what, if any, further
actions were taken.

We also note that the Plant Manager did not respond to the Investigator’s request for an affidavit
and both S1 and the Lead Manager apparently did not respond to the Investigator’s request for a
supplemental affidavit. Id. at 97. Further, C1, the alleged harasser, was curiously not asked to
provide an affidavit for the record.

2
  The AJ sent all orders via email, not by U.S. mail, to Complainant and his Representative. The
AJ noted in his September 12, 2019, Order to Show Cause that Complainant’s Representative
acknowledged via email that Complainant had not submitted the affidavit. We note, however,
that Complainant Representative was not an attorney, and hence the record does not reflect
whether Complainant had been receiving the AJ’s orders through email. On appeal, Complainant
lists a different email address than the ones listed by the AJ in his orders to Complainant.
                                               6                                   2020000963

Finally, we note that Complainant alleged that management discussed his "personal family and
medical business with" the alleged harasser. The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 791,
specifically protects the rights of employees to keep their medical records confidential. See 29
C.F.R. §§ 1630.14(c)(1), 1630.14(d)(4)(i). It is not clear what information management
allegedly disclosed and whether it constituted confidential medical information.

Based on the above, we conclude that the present record lacks the necessary information upon
which to adequately determine if the Agency's actions amount to a hostile work environment.
Accordingly, we remand this case back to the Agency to conduct a supplemental investigation.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency's final decision and REMAND
Complainant's complaint in accordance with this decision and the Order below.

                                           ORDER

The Agency is ORDERED to take the following actions:

   1. The Agency shall conduct a supplemental investigation to develop an accurate factual
      record regarding Complainant's hostile work environment claim, as described above. The
      Agency shall obtain all relevant evidence to address the hostile work environment claim,
      including, but not limited to:

              a. Sworn affidavits from the four coworkers who submitted the notarized
                 statements in support of Complainant’s appeal;

              b. A sworn affidavit from C1 addressing Complainant’s allegations that she
                 subjected him to a hostile work environment;

              c. An affidavit from the Plant Manager and supplemental affidavits from S1 and
                 the Lead Manager, explaining if they received Complainant’s March 7, 2018,
                 documentation, which he apparently sent to them, complaining about C1’s
                 harassment. They should also explain in more detail what actions, if any, were
                 done to address Complainant’s allegations;

              d. The PS-13 documentation which S1 stated that Complainant presented, which
                 she then forwarded to the Lead Manager;

              e. Another opportunity for Complainant to submit an affidavit for the record.
                 The request shall be sent to Complainant’s updated address;

              f. A rebuttal statement from Complainant after he has had an opportunity to
                 review the requested sworn affidavits and documents; and
                                                7                                     2020000963

               g. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains any other affidavits or
                  documentation not specifically requested in this Order, and consistent with
                  this opinion, which may be relevant in determining the merits of
                  Complainant's complaint.

   2. The Agency shall complete its supplemental investigation and issue a new final decision,
      together with the appropriate appeal rights, within one hundred and twenty (120) calendar
      days of the date this decision was issued, unless the matter is otherwise resolved prior to
      that time. A copy of the Agency's new final decision must be sent to the Compliance
      Officer as referenced below.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                                  8                                 2020000963

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 9                                      2020000963

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 7, 2021
Date
