             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                       Evelyn M., 1
                                       Complainant,

                                             v.

                                  Denis R. McDonough,
                                        Secretary,
                              Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                         Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2020001374

                               Hearing No. 480-2018-00304X

                            Agency No. 200P-0664-2017102312

                                        DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s October
22, 2019 final order concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
(ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                     BACKGROUND

Complainant worked as a Nurse Recruiter, VN-3, at the Agency’s Medical Center in San Diego,
California. On June 28, 2017, Complainant filed a formal complaint in which she alleged that
the Agency discriminated against her on the basis of age (64) when:

          1. Her position was realigned and certain functions and responsibilities were taken
             away from her;

          2. She was placed in pay retention status after moving from the Administrative
             Nursing salary schedule to the Registered Nursing (RN) salary schedule; and



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020001374

           3. She was subjected to a hostile work environment as evidenced by the following
              incidents:

                   a. On unspecified dates, she experienced difficulty scheduling meetings with
                      the Nursing Executive (NX);

                   b. On unspecified dates in December 2016, NX instructed her to use mail for
                      RMS requests rather than a recurring meeting;

                   c. On January 20, 2017, and several other dates, Complainant was unable to
                      access the S-Drive;

                   d. On an unspecified date in January 2017, Complainant learned from a
                      coworker that NX had said that she talks to much;

                   e. Complainant had not received a new functional statement from the Nurse
                      Director (ND); and

                   f. On an unspecified date between June and October 2017, NX confided in
                      the Nurse Manager that she wanted to remove the “old guard” and bring in
                      a new young team that she could develop.

The Agency investigated the complaint and notified Complainant of her right to request a
hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission)
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing. On July 9, 2018, the AJ assigned
to the matter (AJ1) issued an Acknowledgement and Order that, among other things, included
directions that discovery needed to be completed within 90 calendar days from the date of receipt
of the order, unless the parties mutually agreed to extend the deadline. The Order also included
the regulations specifying the sanctions that an AJ could impose for failure to follow her orders.
In addition, it included a recitation of the circumstances under which an AJ could issue a
decision on summary judgment without holding a hearing. The certificate of service stated that it
would be presumed that the parties received the Order within five calendar days after the date it
was sent via email, and that the Order was sent via email on July 9, 2018 to Complainant’s work
email address.

On October 15, 2018, Complainant, through her attorney, filed a motion for sanctions requesting
that a default judgment be entered against the Agency. In her motion, she cited what she
characterized as multiple deficiencies in the conduct of the investigation and of the investigative
record itself. Among her assertions: an assistant in the EEO Office deceived the investigator;
that the investigator failed to question numerous witnesses; that the investigative report was
improperly redacted; and that the Agency’s counsel objected to extending the discovery deadline
knowing that she did not receive a copy of the Acknowledgment and Order until August 31,
2018.
                                                3                                     2020001374

On November 16, 2018, the case was reassigned to a new AJ (AJ2). That same day, AJ2 issued
the notice of assignment and an Order denying Complainant’s motion for sanctions and denying
her motion to extend the discovery deadline. As to the sanctions Order, the AJ stated:

       Complainant states in her motion that the Agency received her formal complaint
       via email on June 29, 2017. She further states that the Agency provided her with
       a copy of the investigative file on January 4, 2018. The 180th day following the
       filing of the complaint was December 26, 2017. Based on these representations,
       Complainant argues that the Agency violated 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f) because it
       did not provide her with a copy of the investigative file within 180 days of the
       filing of the complaint.

       Complainant’s motion omits the following critical facts. On November 6, 2017,
       the investigator sent an email to Complainant asking her if she would agree to a
       30-day extension of the investigation deadline because of anticipated delays
       related to the approaching holidays. Complainant sent an email the same day
       stating that she agreed. The investigator responded with an email asking
       Complainant to specifically state that she agreed to a 30-day extension.
       Complainant confirmed that she agreed. Investigative File, pp. 103-104. *** I
       find that the email exchange constituted a written agreement for a voluntary
       extension within the meaning of § 1614.108(e).

       The failure of Complainant’s counsel to identify or address the November 6, 2017
       extension in the instant Motion is troubling. [A]ll the emails addressing the
       extension are included in the investigative file. Moreover, they are included in
       bookmarked Tab 3-3 which is entitled “3-3 Request for 30-day Extension of
       Investigative Period.” The instant motion contains literally dozens of citations to
       the file. Therefore, it is exceedingly unlikely that counsel’s failure to identify or
       address the emails regarding the 30-day extension that are clearly identified in the
       Investigative File was an oversight or excusable neglect. The most likely
       explanation for the omission from the instant motion of the critical fact of the
       emails discussing the extension is that Complainant’s counsel deliberately
       attempted to mislead the Commission and/or submitted an argument that counsel
       knew had no merit.

       The attempt by Complainant’s counsel to mislead the Commission is sufficient
       grounds to deny the entirety of Complainant’s motion for sanctions. Even if it
       were not sufficient, Complainant’s motion fails to identify any grounds sufficient
       to sanction the Agency for reasons related to its investigation of the instant
       complaint or related to the conduct of Agency counsel.              Accordingly,
       Complainant’s motion for sanctions is denied.

AJ2 also denied Complainant’s motion to extend the discovery deadline by 30 days, which
Complainant had filed on September 26, 2018:
                                                4                                    2020001374

       The certificate of service attached to [AJ1’s Acknowledgement and Order dated
       July 9, 2018] was served on Complainant via email addressed to [her work email
       address]. However, Complaint had retired prior to July 2018. That address was
       her former work email. Complainant’s motion includes a representation from
       Complainant’s counsel that Complainant did not receive a copy of the Order until
       August 31, 2018, when she requested a copy in an email she sent on that date to
       an EEOC administrative support employee. The motion does not include a copy
       of the August 31, 2018 email. ***

       The Agency states that Complainant served her discovery requests on September
       20, 2018. However, the Agency attached to its opposition a copy of an email that
       Complainant sent to Agency counsel on August 30, 2018. The email states, “My
       understanding of our instructions *** required that both parties submit/exchange
       settlement proposals within 30 days of receipt of instructions (received email
       8/4/18).” The Agency argues that the “instructions” refers to instructions set forth
       in the Acknowledgment and Order and that the email acknowledges that
       Complainant received such instructions via email on August 4, 2018.

       Complainant’s motion does not address the August 4 email. Specifically,
       Complainant does not explain how she knew of the instructions set forth in the
       Acknowledgment and Order requiring the parties to exchange settlement
       proposals within 30 days of receipt if she had not yet received the Order. In
       determining the factual basis for Complainant’s motion, I am taking into account
       that the motion does not include any corroboration of the representation of
       Complainant’s counsel that Complaint sent the August 31, 2018 email or that
       Complainant did not receive the Acknowledgement and Order until that date.

       I find that Complainant has not established by a preponderance of the evidence
       that she did not receive the Acknowledgement and Order until August 31, 2018.
       Accordingly, Complainant’s motion to extend the discovery deadline is hereby
       denied.

On February 28, 2019, the Agency filed a motion for summary judgment. On June 17, 2019, a
second notice of reassignment was issued informing the parties that the case had been reassigned
from AJ2 to a new AJ (AJ3). On October 2, 2019, AJ3 granted the Agency’s motion for
summary judgment. AJ3 reaffirmed AJ2’s denial of Complainant’s motion to extend the
discovery period, finding that Agency presented unrebutted evidence that Complainant received
the Acknowledgment and Order prior to August 31, 2018 and that Complainant failed to notify
the Agency of her new email addressed after she retired from her job. AJ3’s Decision (October
2, 2019), pp. 10-12.

On the merits of Complainant’s complaint, the AJ found that the Agency had articulated
legitimate and nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions that Complainant failed to show were
pretext for age discrimination. AJ3’s Decision, pp. 13-20. As to Complainant’s hostile work
                                                5                                    2020001374

environment claim, AJ3 found that the incidents comprising her claim were neither sufficiently
severe or pervasive enough to rise to the level of actionable harassment nor motivated by
unlawful considerations of Complainant’s age. AJ3 Decision, pp. 20-23. With regard to incident
3(f), the age-related remarks allegedly made by NX, AJ3 found that the comments did not refer
to Complainant and were too remote and ambiguous to link unrelated incidents to a
discriminatory motive. AJ3 Decision, p. 20. Accordingly, AJ3 found that Complainant was not
subjected to discrimination as alleged. AJ3 did not address AJ2’s decision to deny imposing
sanctions upon the Agency in connection with its conduct of the investigation or its preparation
of the investigative report.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contends that the Agency’s motion for summary judgment should have
been denied because it was defective on its face. Complainant also reiterates that she was
prevented from engaging in discovery and that the denial of her motion to extend discovery by
AJ2 and AJ3 constituted an abuse of discretion on the part of these Administrative Judges.
Finally, Complainant maintains that AJ2 abused his discretion in declining to issue a default
judgment against the Agency. She also contests AJ3’s summary judgment finding on the merits.
The Agency responded that it met its burden to articulate legitimate and nondiscriminatory
reasons for its actions that Complainant failed to demonstrate were pretextual.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Complainant’s Request for Sanctions

The Commission’s regulations confer upon its AJs very broad responsibility for adjudicating an
EEO complaint once a complainant’s hearing request has been granted, and that responsibility
gives the AJs wide latitude in directing the terms, conduct, or course of EEO administrative
hearings. Chere S. v. Gen. Serv. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0720180012 (Nov. 30, 2018). The
AJ’s discretionary authority includes the power to impose sanctions upon a party that fails to
comply with his orders. Id. When the complainant fails without good cause shown to respond
fully and in timely fashion to an order of an administrative judge, or requests for the
investigative file, for documents, records, comparative data, statistics, affidavits, or the
attendance of witness(es), the administrative judge shall, in appropriate circumstances: (i) Draw
an adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony of the requested witness,
would have reflected unfavorably on the party refusing to provide the requested information; (ii)
Consider the matters to which the requested information or testimony pertains to be established
in favor of the opposing party; (iii) Exclude other evidence offered by the party failing to
produce the requested information or witness; (iv) Issue a decision fully or partially in favor of
the opposing party; or (v) Take such other actions as appropriate. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(f)(3).

Sanctions serve a dual purpose. On the one hand, they aim to deter the underlying conduct of the
non-complying party and prevent similar misconduct in the future. Barbour v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC 07A30133 (June 16, 2005). On the other hand, they are corrective and provide equitable
                                                6                                    2020001374

remedies to the opposing party. Given these dual purposes, sanctions must be tailored to each
situation by applying the least severe sanction necessary to respond to a party’s failure to show
good cause for its actions and to equitably remedy the opposing party. Royal v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009). Factors pertinent to
“tailoring” a sanction, or determining whether a sanction is even warranted, include: (1) the
extent and nature of the non-compliance, including the justification presented by the non-
complying party; (2) the prejudicial effect of the non-compliance on the opposing party; (3) the
consequences resulting from the delay in justice, if any; (4) the number of times the party has
engaged in such conduct; and (5) the effect on the integrity of the EEO process as a whole. Id.

A default judgment against an agency is among the harshest sanctions that can be meted out. For
that reason, the default judgment should only be imposed upon agencies that directly defy
Commission orders and whose actions adversely impacted the conduct of the hearing. Such a
situation had occurred in Chere S., supra. In that case, the AJ ordered the agency to stop filing
frivolous motions to dismiss the complaint on procedural grounds and made it very clear that the
agency would be subject to sanctions if it continued to file such motions. Despite the AJ’s
warning, the agency in Chere S. went ahead and filed another motion to dismiss in direct
defiance of the AJ’s order for the agency to engage with the complainant in order to resolve the
case. The Commission agreed with the AJ that the sanction of default judgment was warranted
because the agency had repeatedly delayed the start of the hearing due to its repeated
unsuccessful attempts to have the complaint dismissed on procedural grounds knowing that the
likelihood of success on those motions was nil. The AJ also pointed out that the agency’s
conduct had the adverse effect of bottlenecking the administrative process, which in turn
impacted on the ability to hear other pending cases. Chere S. thus stands for the proposition that
default judgment may be imposed upon an agency that deliberately disobeys an order from the
AJ and that disobedience adversely impacts the conduct of the hearing or undermines the
integrity of the administrative EEO process.

Such circumstances were clearly absent in a more recently issued decision, Salvatore B. v. Dep’t
of Agriculture, EEOC Appeal No. 2019005314 (Mar. 5, 2021). In this case, the complainant
requested that a default judgment be entered against the agency for issuing, among other things,
an untimely final decision. We found that it took the agency 398 days to issue a final decision
from the date it had completed a supplemental investigation, and when it finally did issue that
decision, it failed to address claims raised in an amendment to the complaint. It took the agency
another seven months to issue its second decision addressing those claims. Nevertheless, the
Commission concluded that despite the fact that the delay extended over a year, it would not
impose the sanction of a default judgment because the complainant failed to show that he had
been prejudiced by the delay or that the delay was unconscionable.

In the case now before us, Complainant sought a default judgment based upon her assertions that
the investigation and the investigatory report were inadequate. Both her motion for default
judgment and her appeal brief cite dozens of minute points throughout the record in support of
her contention that a default judgment was warranted. She also argues that the investigative
report was issued eight days late. However, Complainant does not address AJ2’s finding that her
                                               7                                    2020001374

counsel had omitted discussion of the investigator’s request for a 30-day extension of the
investigatory time frame, and that Complainant had agreed to that extension. Complainant thus
does not address the central issue in AJ2’s denial of her motion for default judgment, namely
what AJ2 characterizes as an attempt by her counsel to mislead the Commission regarding the
tardiness of the investigative report. Moreover, despite her extensive citations to what she
characterizes as the investigative report’s shortcomings, she has not identified anything in the
report that tends to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to the issues in her complaint.
Complainant has likewise presented no evidence tending to show that the Agency disobeyed
Commission orders in a way that adversely impacted the conduct of the proceeding or the
integrity of the process, circumstances that were clearly present in Chere S. but absent in
Salvatore B. We therefore find no abuse of discretion on the part of AJ2 in denying
Complainant’s motion for a default judgment against the Agency.


Denial of Discovery Extension Requests

Next, Complainant argues that AJ2’s and AJ3’s denial of her discovery requests constitutes an
abuse of discretion. As discussed above, AJs have broad discretion in the conduct of hearings,
including discovery and the determination of whether to admit evidence, or permit or compel the
testimony of witnesses. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(e); Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO-MD-110), at Ch. 7 (Aug. 5, 2015). Here,
Complainant claimed that she did not receive the Acknowledgment and Order until August 31,
2018 and requested that the discovery period be extended. The record reveals that Complainant
failed to inform the Commission or the Agency of her new email address following her
retirement; however, the AJs noted that Complainant was not forthright about an email indicating
that she received AJ2’s July 9, 2018 Acknowledgment and Order much earlier than August 31,
2018. Complainant’s motion to extend the discovery time frame did not address that email.
Premising her request for a discovery extension upon a materially false statement is quite
substantial, and a grant of the motion would have needlessly extended an already drawn-out
process. The Commission has reviewed the record and finds no abuse of discretion by the AJs.
Further, the Commission is unable to find any evidence of bias, or other reversible error,
resulting from the manner in which the AJs managed this case.


Summary Judgment on the Merits

The Commission's regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is
“genuine” if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-
moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp.,
846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the
outcome of the case. In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and
factual conclusions, and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a)(stating that a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on
                                                 8                                     2020001374

a de novo review…”); see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO-MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (as revised, August 5, 2015)(providing that
an administrative judge’s determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision
itself, will both be reviewed de novo).

In order to successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a complainant must identify,
with specificity, facts in dispute either within the record or by producing further supporting
evidence and must further establish that such facts are material under applicable law. Such a
dispute would indicate that a hearing is necessary to produce evidence to support a finding that
the agency was motivated by discriminatory animus. Here, however, Complainant has failed to
establish such a dispute. Even construing any inferences raised by the undisputed facts in favor
of Complainant, a reasonable fact-finder could not find in Complainant’s favor.

After a review of the record in its entirety, including consideration of all statements submitted on
appeal, it is the decision of the Commission to affirm the final Agency order. We agree with the
AJ that the record establishes that, even assuming arguendo, Complainant established a prima
facie case of discrimination, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions and Complainant failed to show that the reasons were pretext. In particular, with respect
to the realignment of her duties, NX conducted a review of Nursing Services upon entering duty
at the facility and decided to realign many employees, including Complainant. NX and other
officials confirmed that the realignment allowed Complainant to focus on her primary
recruitment duties, to address staffing issues, to prioritize a project that needed immediate
attention, and to address inefficiencies. In addition, regarding the change to Complainant’s pay
schedule, a Human Resources Specialist determined in August 2014 that some employees,
including Complainant, were being incorrectly paid on the Administrative Nurse schedule. In
October 2016, officials decided to place Complainant on the proper RN schedule, but after NX
expressed concern about the effects to Complainant, Human Resources allowed Complainant to
be placed on pay retention without any attempts to recoup any prior overpayment. NX noted that
all employees under the incorrect pay schedule were moved as well. We also agree with the AJ
that the record establishes that Complainant failed to demonstrate that the incidents complained
of in this complaint were severe or pervasive enough to establish a hostile work environment.

Accordingly, we find that the Administrative Judge's ultimate finding, that unlawful employment
discrimination was not proven by a preponderance of the evidence, is supported by the record.
As a result, the Agency's final order adopting the AJ’s decision is AFFIRMED.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:


       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                                9                                     2020001374

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                               10                                    2020001374

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


____________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 24, 2021
Date
