             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Mac O.,1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    James F. Bridenstine,
                                       Administrator,
                        National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                  (Kennedy Space Center),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2019000708

                               Agency No. NCN-16-KSC-00007

                                          DECISION

On October 16, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 10, 2018, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission VACATES and REMANDSthe Agency’s final decision.

                                    ISSUES PRESENTED

The issue presented in this case is whether the record is developed enough for the Commission to
determine whether the Agency properly framed and addressed Complainant’s reasonable
accommodation allegation.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2019000708

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was a Safety and Occupational
Health Specialist, GS-12, at the Agency’s Safety and Mission Assurance Directorate,
Institutional Safety Branch at Kennedy Space Center, Florida.

On June 18, 2013, Complainant injured his right large toe when he hit it on the toe-kick of
astaircase banister. He sought medical treatment and was referred to an orthopedic doctor for
evaluation.It was noted that Complainant had experienced a broken toe, and joint damage which
required a rheumatology consultation. He returned to work with an order for modified duty from
July 30, 2013 to August 14, 2013. On August 1, 2014, Complainant was re-evaluated. The
Florida Workers’ Compensation Uniform Medical Treatment Status Reporting Form showed that
Complainant was not able to climb, kneel, pull, push, squat, or stand.

Upon his return to work, Complainant asserted that his doctor’s orders were not followed, and he
was made to climb stairs as well as stand and walk for extended periods of time. Complainant
alleged thathe was given excessive work assignments that were beyond his physical limitations.
He believed this was done as part of an effort to force him to resign his position.As a result of his
injury, Complainant alleged that he received a Fully Successful performance rating for the May
1, 2013 to April 30, 2014, rating period, which was lower than his previous rating. Complainant
also requested reassignment to another office that would respect his limitations, but hisrequest
was denied.

On February 3, 2014, Complainant expressed interest in the Voluntary Early Retirement
Authority (VERA)program. On September 30, 2014,he retired under VERA. On August 20,
2014, Complainant also applied for Disability Retirement.Complainant maintained that the
Agency provided false information and errors in his disability package, that included that
Complainant was not performing his full duties and that those duties were sedentary. This
caused Complainant to be ineligible for disability retirement. Complainant’sretirement
checkswerealso canceled on two occasions after the Agency alleged that he owed money.

Following Complainant’sretirement,he applied for and received a tentative job offer from a
different agency. The offer, however, was later withdrawn. Complainant maintained that the
offer was rescinded because his former supervisor provided a negative reference to the
prospective employer. Complainant argued that these incidents were all apart of the harassment
and reprisal that he experienced.

On September 28, 2014, Complainant filed an appeal with the MSPB alleging that his retirement
was involuntary.
                                                3                                    2019000708

He also alleged discrimination based on his disability when management gave him the largest
workload after he was injured, and when the Agencycreated an intolerable and discriminatory
working environmentthat included: improperly lowering his performance rating; and refusing his
request to relocate. The MSPB dismissed Complainant’s appeal for lack of jurisdiction on
January 30, 2015. Complainant thereafter contacted an EEO Counselor.2

On December 23, 2015, Complainant filed the instant EEO complaintalleging that the Agency
subjected him to discriminatory harassment on the bases of disability (right large toe, sporadic
gout and sporadic arthritis) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1. he received a performance evaluation for the May 1, 2013 – April 30, 2014,
          performance period which was lower than the previous rating period; he was given
          excessive work assignments that were beyond his physical limitations as part of an
          on-going effort to force him to resign his position as Safety andOccupational Health
          Specialist, GS-12, in the Safety and MissionAssurance Directorate;his performance
          evaluation was posted; he was not promoted;he did not receive a bonus; and his
          supervisor included Bible verses at the end of his emails. As a result of the
          discrimination, Complainant eventually resigned under the Voluntary Early
          Retirement Authority on September 30, 2014; and

       2. he was subjected to additional incidents of harassment beginning February 2013 to
          the present, including, but not limited to when management provided false
          informationregarding his injury and his checks were stopped, and negative comments
          were given to potential employers.3

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination or harassment
as alleged.
                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contends, among other things, that he was verbally bullied, harassed,
and physically discriminated against by management. Complainant asserts that due to
management’s actions he was unable to heal.


2
   The Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) dismissed Appellant's appeal (regarding
involuntary resignation) for lack of jurisdiction in the January 30, 2015 Initial Decision and the
August 19, 2015, Final Order. Complainant timely contacted the Agency’s EEO office on
October 9, 2015, the 45th calendar day from receipt of the MSPB Final Order. Pursuant to 29
CFR 1614.302(c)(2)(ii), the MSPB determined it did not have jurisdiction. The Agency shall
recommence processing of the non-mixed EEO complaint.
3
  This claim was added as part of Complainant’s request to amend his complaint.
                                                4                                    2019000708

He maintains that to get away from management’s discriminatory actions he asked to be moved
to another work environment but was refused. Complainant also contends that management lied
regarding their abiding by the Florida Worker’s Compensation restriction forms that he
submitted.

In response, the Agency, contends among other things, that it articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, and Complainant did not show that the reasons were
pretext for discrimination. The Agency also maintains that Complainant did not show that the
incidents complained of were severe or pervasive enough to establish a hostile work
environment. The Agency argues that there was no evidence that Complainant requested an
accommodation,as he had been cleared to walk short distances.It also argues that there was no
evidence that Complainant submitted multiple Medical Treatment Status reports.The Agency
requests that the FAD be affirmed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). SeeEqual Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novostandard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Reasonable Accommodation

In the instant case, we find that the Agency mischaracterized Complainant’s case as purely a
harassment and reprisal case, when a fair reading of Complainant’s allegations is that he was
denied a reasonable accommodation.This is supported by the fact that Complainant maintained
that he was required to work outside of his doctor’s restrictions and he requested reassignment to
a different unit,a unit where his restrictions would be respected. The Commission's regulations
have long held that an Agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known
physical and mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §1630.9. To
establish that he was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: (1) he is
an individual with a disability, as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) he is a “qualified”
individual with a disability pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed to
provide him with a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on
Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
                                                  5                                     2019000708

Accommodation). The term “qualified,” with respect to an individual with a disability, means
that the individual satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related
requirements of the employment position such individual holds and, with or without reasonable
accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the position. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).

Further, the Commission has held that a request for a modification or change at work because of
a medical condition is a request for reasonable accommodation. Enforcement Guidance on
Reasonable Accommodation at Question 1.After receiving a request for reasonable
accommodation, an Agency “must make a reasonable effort to determine the appropriate
accommodation.” 29 C.F.R. pt. 1614. app. § 1630.9. Thus, “it may be necessary for the [agency]
to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability . . . [to] identify
the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that
could overcome those limitations.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3); see also 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. §
1630.9; Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation at Question 5.

Reasonable accommodation includes such modifications or adjustments as job restructuring, the
acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, and reassignment to a vacant position. 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii). In general, reassignment is the reasonable accommodation of last
resort and should be considered only when (1) there are no effective accommodations that would
enable an employee to perform the essential functions of his or her current position or (2)
accommodating the employee in the current position would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R.
pt. 1630 app. § 1630.2(n); Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation,
“Reassignment.

In the instant case, Complainant alleged that management pushed him to work past his
restrictions; which includedstanding,walking and climbing for extended periods of time (ROI-
supplement, at 18). He alsorequestedthat his non-sedentary workload be removed,
butmanagement refused.Id.Complainant requested that he be transferred to another office that
would respect his restrictions, or that he be assigned laboratories in the same facility, again his
requests were denied.Id., at 19 and 20.

We note that, during the investigative stage of the federal administrative process, the Agency has
an obligation to develop an adequate investigative record. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108. “An appropriate
factual record is one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw conclusions as to whether
discrimination occurred.” Id. § 1614.108(b). The investigator must conduct a thorough
investigation, “identifying and obtaining all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how
it may affect the outcome.” EEO MD-110, Chap. 6 § V.D. Therefore, the investigator must
exhaust those sources of information likely to support the positions of Complainant and the
Agency.SeeDarleen R. v Department of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120152909 (Nov.
3, 2017).

In this case, we find that the investigator failed to develop an adequate record with regard to
Complainant’s allegation that he was denied a reasonable accommodation.
                                               6                                    2019000708

The complaint was investigated solely as a harassment/reprisal complaint and not a disability
complaint/failure to provide a reasonable accommodation complaint. Therefore, we do not have
information regarding whether the interactive process was initiated between Complainant and
management. We do not know if Complainant was a qualified individual with a disability. We do
not know whether Complainant was entitled to an accommodation, whether an accommodation
was provided, or whether it was effective. What we have is evidence that Complainant
repeatedly asked for a modification of his position so that he could work within his medical
restrictions.

Further, the investigation did not reveal whether, and to what extent, the Agency conducted a
search for an equivalent vacant position to which it could have reassigned Complainant. The
investigation also did not identify available positionsor grant Complainant an opportunity to
address whether he could have performed the essential functions of vacant positions with or
without reasonable accommodation. SeeBill A. v. Dept' of the Army, EEOC Appeal No.
0120141989 (Oct. 26, 2016) (as part of the federal-sector EEO investigative process, the
investigator must obtain relevantinformation about the availability of vacant, funded
positions.)Therefore, we find that the record does not contain adequate information to make a
determination        regarding      Complainant’s      disability/denial    of      reasonable
accommodationclaim.Finally, because Complainant's reasonable accommodation claim is so
closely intertwined with his disparate treatment and harassment claims, we remand the entirety
of Complainant's complaint for further
consideration after the supplemental investigation.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, based on a thorough review of the record, we VACATE the Agency’s final
decision and REMAND this matter to the Agency to conduct a supplemental investigation and to
take further action consistent with this decision and the ORDERS below.

                                            ORDER

The Agency is ORDERED to take the following actions:

1. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date that this decision becomes final, the Agency shall
undertake and complete a supplemental investigation of this complaint, by obtaining detailed
sworn statements and relevant documentation in the following manner:

   A. The Agency shall supplement the record with all medical examinations, assessments, or
      determinations by Complainant’s physician and the Florida OWCP/Department of Labor
      that were used to order Complainant to return to full duty, or to deny Complainant's
      request for work within his restrictions.

   B. The Agency shall identify Complainant’s job duties from August 1, 2013, to August 1,
      2014, including modifications made,if any,to those duties. The Agency shall also
                                                7                                    2019000708

        identify whether Complainant requested a reasonable accommodation and identify the
        responsible responding party.

   C. The Agency shall supplement the record with any other documentation that was used by
      the Agency in making the decision to order Complainant to return to full duty, or to deny
      Complainant's request for work within his restrictions.


   D. The Agency shall supplement the record with documentation regarding the duties of
      Complainant's modified duty assignment, or Complainant's restrictions at the time he
      accepted and encumbered the assignment.

   E. The Agency shall supplement the record with documentation, including sworn
      statements, that reveal whether there were vacant positions to which Complainant was
      qualified to be reassigned with or without a reasonable accommodation, and to what
      extent, the Agency conducted a search for an equivalent vacant position to which it
      could have reassigned Complainant.

   F.   The Agency shall grant Complainant an opportunity to address for the record whether he
        could have performed the essential functions of vacant positions with or without
        reasonable accommodation.

The Agency shall instruct the investigator to compile the above information into an investigative
reportand transmit it to the Agency within one hundred and twenty (120) days of the date that
this decision becomes final. The report shall be inclusive of all claims raised in Complainant's
complaint, as characterized above and consistent with this decision. No later than sixty (60) days
after receiving the report, the Agency will insure that Complainant is in receipt of a copy of the
report, and also provide a copy to the Compliance Officer referenced below. Upon completion of
the investigative report and receipt by Complainant, the Agency shall again provide Complainant
with the opportunity to request a hearing before an Administrative Judge or have the Agency
issue a final decision.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION(K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
                                                8                                     2019000708

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 CFR § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact
               or law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of
Federal Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for
reconsideration in which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405;
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Complainant’s request may be submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail
within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The
agency’s request must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party. Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely
filing of the request.
                                                 9                                      2019000708

Any supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT'S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty
(180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal
with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint
the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or
her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing
of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 21, 2020
Date
