             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Jody L., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                     Thomas J. Vilsack,
                                         Secretary,
                                  Department of Agriculture
                                      (Forest Service),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020001596

                                 Agency No. FS-2019-00324

                                         DECISION

On December 3, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 5, 2019, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                    ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Final Agency Decision (FAD) correctly determined that Complainant was not
subjected to discrimination and harassment based on his disability and age.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was an applicant for three
separate positions at the Agency’s locations in Albuquerque and Santa Fe, New Mexico. On
March 22, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of disability (deaf) and age (62) when:


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                   2020001596

   1. on February 10, 2019, Complainant was not selected for a Budget Analyst position in
      Albuquerque, New Mexico;

   2. on February 6, 2019, Complainant was not selected for an Information Technology
      Project Manager position in Albuquerque, NM; and

   3. on November 14, 2018, Complainant was not selected for a Public Affairs Specialist
      position in Santa Fe, NM.

The record indicates that Complainant had also alleged that: 1) on June 18, 2018, Complainant
was not selected for a Public Affairs Specialist position in Albuquerque, NM (Vacancy
Announcement Number not provided); and 2) from November 9, 2016 to June 15, 2018, the
Agency's Schedule A Specialist refused to assist Complainant in submitting applications under
Schedule A. The Agency dismissed both claims, explaining that the alleged incidents occurred
more than 45 days prior to when Complainant initiated EEO Counselor contact on December 14,
2018, in the instant matter.

Claim 1

Complainant alleged that he applied for the Budget Analyst position through USA Jobs.
Complainant stated that he was referred to the Selecting Official (SO), but he was not
interviewed for the position. Complainant did not know if interviews were held. Complainant
contended that his non-selection was based on his disability and his age. Complainant asserted
that the hiring personnel saw his Schedule A letters showing Complainant's disability and his
degreed dates and transcripts. Complainant asserted that the hiring personnel considered
providing an interpreter for Complainant's interview an undue burden. Complainant contended
that his non-selection constituted harassment because he felt blacklisted due to his age and
disability.

A Responsible Management Official (RMO1) stated that Complainant was not interviewed
because Complainant did not meet the basic criteria for the position. RMO1 noted that
Complainant's experience and background is in television production and film editing. RMO1
added that the candidate selected for the position (Selectee1) was chosen based on Selectee1’s
education, financial background, and his extensive experience in budget finance. RMO1
asserted that he was unaware of Complainant’s age and disability. A Human Resource Specialist
(HRS) provided supporting statements, adding that neither a separate Certificate for Schedule A
applicants nor any information regarding the age or disability status of any applicant was
provided to the RMO1.
                                                 3                                     2020001596

Claim 2

Complainant stated that he applied for the Information Technology Project Manager position and
was placed on the referred list. Complainant alleged that the selecting official (RMO2) did not
conduct interviews for the position. Complainant reiterated his belief that his non-selection was
based on his protected classes, adding that his non-selection was an act of harassment.

RMO2 explained that Complainant was not one of the top 3 candidates because his score was
rated as zero. RMO2 also explained that Complainant's education and experience were unrelated
to the Information Technology Project Manager position. RMO3 stated that Complainant's
experience was related to IT support, project management, media, marketing, public relations,
and digital communications strategies, which is not the experience management was seeking.
RMO2 explained that management was looking for applicants with experience in Forest Service
vegetation applications and databases. RMO2 added that Complainant did not have experience
in resource vegetation management of the computer applications and databases related to the
position.

Claim 3

Complainant stated that he applied for the Public Affairs Specialist position, adding that he was
referred to the Selecting Official (RMO3), but he was not interviewed. Complainant reiterated
his reasons for believing that his non-selection was based on his protected classes. Complainant
alleged that the hiring personnel changed the job announcement by removing “individuals with
disabilities” as a group permitted to apply. Complainant asserted that the Agency did not want to
incur the additional expense for an interpreter.

RMO3 explained that the target grade for the position at issue was a GS-9. RMO3 stated that the
position was not advertised. He explained that his office did outreach to gauge interest, but their
outreach efforts were not considered an announcement. RMO3 also explained that a position is
not officially advertised until it is advertised on USA Jobs. RMO3 explained that the Agency
made the decision not to advertise the position because a critical position became vacant. RMO3
also explained that the office only had one position that they could fill, and the critical position
was priority. RMO3 clarified that the Public Affairs Specialist position has not been filled. He
explained that the supervisor for that position went on military leave and did not want to move
forward with the hiring process until he returned.

In rebuttal, Complainant maintained that RMO1 was aware of his age, as his resume indicated
his degree dates. Complainant asserted that the hiring officials ignored his Schedule A status by
not affording him the opportunity to interview. Regarding Claim 2, Complainant noted that the
announcement did not mention the need for experience in Forest Service vegetation applications
and databases. Complainant maintained that RMO2 did not comply with Schedule A policy by
selecting the three highly qualified candidates instead of conducting interviews.
                                               4                                   2020001596

Complainant also maintained that Agencies are not permitted to hire individuals based solely on
resumes. Complainant asserted that he was prevented from showcasing his skills, and an
interview would have given him that opportunity. Regarding Claim 3, Complainant contended
that RMO3's testimony is false because the job was advertised on USA Jobs on June 15, 2018,
and November 12, 2018.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

In his Appeal statements, Complainant reiterates his allegations, and contests the Agency’s
dismissal of his two other claims. Complainant also contests the FAD, indicating that the
Agency’s decisions not to interview or hire Complainant for any of the positions for which he
applied were a direct result of discrimination against him based on Complainant’s disability.
Complainant indicates his interest in an opportunity to present important evidence at a hearing.

The Agency did not submit Appeal Statements.

                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Requests for a Hearing After FAD Issuance

At the onset, we note Complainant’s request on appeal for an opportunity to present important
evidence at a hearing. However, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108, an Agency has an obligation
to develop an adequate investigative record. The Agency also has an obligation to inform
Complainant of the right to elect/request an AJ hearing or a FAD. Complainant has 30 days to
respond upon receiving the information.
                                                 5                                     2020001596

The record in the instant complaint indicates that Complainant was provided the requisite
information; and that Complainant timely requested a FAD. Therefore, Complainant’s request
on appeal for a hearing is untimely and cannot be granted. We note that because Complainant
did not request a hearing or avail himself of the discovery process which would have allowed for
an examination of the credibility or lack thereof of the Agency’s explanations, we can only
evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented to us in the instant complaint.

Procedural Dismissal – Other Claims

The Agency dismissed two claims for untimely EEO counselor contact. The EEO regulations at
29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1) provide that, “An aggrieved person must initiate contact with a
Counselor within 45 days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of
personnel action, within 45 days of the effective date of the action.” The regulations also state
that if a complainant fails to initiate informal contact with an EEO counselor within the time
limits set forth in that provision, the allegation in question “shall” be dismissed as untimely. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2). Here, the alleged incidents in the two dismissed claims occurred
more than 45 days prior to Complainant’s initial EEO Counselor contact in the instant complaint.
Therefore, we find that the claims were correctly dismissed.

Disparate Treatment – Claims 1, 2, and 3

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary
scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792
(1973). He must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he was subjected to
an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference of
discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie
case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. 802
at n. 13. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately
prevail, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the agency’s
explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530
U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and
harassment based on disability and age; we find that the Agency articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for not selecting Complainant for any of the three positions for which
he applied.

Regarding the position in Claim 1, RMO1 explained that Complainant was not interviewed
because Complainant did not meet the basic criteria for the Budget Analyst position citing
Complainant’s experience in television production and film editing. The candidate selected for
the position was chosen based on education, financial background, and extensive experience in
budget finance.
                                                6                                    2020001596

Regarding the Information Technology Project Manager position in Claim 2, RMO2 stated that
Complainant’s background was primarily related to IT support, project management, media,
marketing, public relations, and digital communications strategies. However, management was
seeking experience in Forest Service vegetation applications and databases; and Complainant did
not have experience in resource vegetation management of the computer applications and
databases related to the position. Complainant’s experience did not match the management’s
desired background and experience.

RMO3 indicated that the Public Affairs Specialist position in Claim 3 was never filled; that the
position was not advertised; and that the announcement to which Complainant referred was only
to gauge interest in the position.

Complainant refuted management’s explanations but he presented no evidence to support his
allegation of discrimination with respect to Claims 1 and 2. Neither did he provide the alleged
USAJOBS announcements posted for the position raised in Claim 3. Instead, Complainant only
provided mere assertions and subjective beliefs, including stating, without evidence, that the
Agency did not want to incur the additional expense for an interpreter. Complainant also failed
to show that his qualifications were plainly superior to those of the selectees in Claims 1 and 2;
and it is not the intent of the Commission to substitute its judgment for that of the Agency where
discriminatory motives have not been shown.

Importantly, the Commission’s case law is replete with cases supporting the principle that,
absent a showing that Complainant was the best-qualified candidate, management did not
demonstrate discriminatory animus when the most qualified candidates were selected. See e.g.
Judson v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120141750 (May 26, 2016) (declining
to find a pretext of discriminatory action when the Complainant was not selected due to his
application rating of five out of eight candidates); Whitfield v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Doc.
0120082612 (July 11, 2012) (finding that the Complainant failed to show discrimination when
the Complainant's qualifications were not plainly superior to the selectees for two separate
postings); King v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 012022423 (Nov. 2, 2012)
(Complainant was not ranked among the top candidates and presented no evidence of pretext).
As such, Complainant’s claims fail, and he is not entitled to his requested relief.

As to Schedule A, we have previously found that although federal agencies are authorized to use
Schedule A hiring authority when considering individuals with disabilities, “the use of this
authority is not mandatory.” Complainant v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No.
0120131609 (Dec. 16, 2014); Hein v. Nat’l Archives and Records Admin., EEOC Appeal No.
0120123266 (Feb. 6, 2013), request to reconsider denied in EEOC Request No. 0520130314
(Aug. 5, 2013); see generally 5 C.F.R. § 213.3102(u). In EEOC Appeal No. 0120131609, we
also noted that Executive Order 13548 provides that agencies shall generally increase utilization
of Schedule A hiring authority, but does not mandate the use of Schedule A authority in any
hiring decision. Executive Order 13548, Increasing Federal Employment of Individuals with
Disabilities, Federal Register Vol. 75, No. 146 (July 30, 2010).
                                                  7                                  2020001596

With respect to Complainant allegations that his non-selections were harassment, we have held
that a complainant's testimony reflecting "mere assertions and subjective beliefs" about
discrimination is not enough to prove discriminatory harassment. Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000) (indicating that a finding of harassment is
precluded by a determination that Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by
the Agency were motivated by discriminatory animus).

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                8                                     2020001596

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 22, 2021
Date
