             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Lenard H., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                  Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                         Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                                    (U.S. Secret Service),
                                          Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2020002347
                              Agency No. HS-USSS-01072-2018

                                         DECISION

On February 19, 2020, Complainant prematurely filed an appeal with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission) on his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging violations of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
(ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. Complainant complained that after he timely
requested a final agency decision (FAD) on his complaint, the Agency did not issue one.
However, on March 3, 2020, his pending appeal was perfected when the Agency issued a FAD
on the merits of the complaint finding discrimination had been established and ordering various
remedies, including determining appropriate compensatory damages and attorney fees. On June
29, 2020, the Agency issued its FAD on compensatory damages and attorney fees. Complainant,
via Law Firm 2, appealed on August 4, 2020.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by the Agency as
a Polygraph Examining Investigator (Special Agent), GS-1801-13, at the Office of
Investigations, Forensic Services Division, Polygraph Unit, in Washington, D.C.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020002347

On March 19, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging the Agency unlawfully
retaliated against him for engaging in prior protected EEO activity under Title VII and the
ADEA when, in early 2018, he was not considered or selected for reassignment to the position of
Criminal Investigator (Special Agent), GS-1811-13, at the Office of Investigations, Forensic
Services Division, Polygraph Branch, Headquarters Quality Control/Operations in Washington,
D.C., under open vacancy number 18-2-32.

After an EEO investigation, which was supplemented, Complainant requested a FAD without a
hearing. In its March 3, 2020 FAD, the Agency found that management failed to articulate any
reason for not awarding Complainant his bid for reassignment. The Agency’s FAD found that
the sole decision-maker on Complainant’s bid for the position in question, who was retired, did
not submit an EEO investigatory statement and no one in management had insight into his
thinking. As such, the Agency’s FAD concluded that responsible management did not rebut
Complainant’s prima facie case and, therefore, found unlawful retaliatory animus was
established.

As relief, the Agency ordered management to reassign Complainant to the position he sought, or
a substantially equivalent one, give EEO training to Forensic Services Division managers
focusing on reprisal, post a notice of the finding of discrimination, and directed that Complainant
have an opportunity to submit evidence of compensatory damages and attorney fees, which the
Agency would process.

Complainant, without legal representation, submitted statements and documentation to support
his claims for compensatory damages and attorney fees. In its June 29, 2020 FAD, the Agency
awarded him $10,000 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages and denied all attorney fees.

On appeal, Complainant argues that he should have been awarded the damages and attorney fees
he previously requested when submitting his claims to the Agency. Specifically, he had listed 10
out-of-town work trips in four locations he purportedly lost by not being reassigned, and the
combined amount of overtime pay and per diem he would have received for them broken down
by in total by location (but not separating overtime pay and per diem). The overtime pay and per
diem totaled $25,279.59. He claimed $5,000 in lost bonuses. Complainant characterized all this
as pecuniary damages. He requested $107,175 in damages. Complainant asked for $5,429.83 in
attorney fees he was billed by Law Firm 1, plus $17.04 in interest billed by it for past due
balance.

As evidence for his nonpecuniary damages claim, Complainant submitted declarations by a
coworker and his spouse. In his April 4, 2020 declaration, the coworker stated that from 2018 to
the present he witnessed management subject Complainant to retaliation by excluding him from
the highly coveted collateral duties of Mentoring and Quality Control, deny him recognition as a
Subject Matter Expert, give him lower ratings on his performance evaluations from 2018 to the
present, have him investigated for an allegation of misconduct for which he was cleared, and not
selecting him in February 2018 to the lateral position for which he bid.
                                                3                                     2020002347

The coworker wrote that since the above retaliation began, while Complainant maintained his
professionalism and strong work ethic, but his outgoing and upbeat spirit definitely seemed to
diminish by a newfound cynicism. In her April 8, 2020 declaration, Complainant’s spouse stated
that over the past two years she witnessed the devasting effects of her husband being subjected to
a hostile work environment where he was disparately treated by his supervisors and compelled to
defend his professional reputation. She stated that because he was not selected for reassignment
in February 2018, her husband had difficulty sleeping, and became increasingly irritable and
withdrawn, which alienated him from several close friends and family members and placed a
burdensome strain on their marriage.

In reply to Complainant’s appeal, Agency legal counsel argues that Complainant should not get
any attorney fees and the award of $10,000 in pecuniary damages should not be increased, or in
the alternative reduced.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As an initial matter, the parties do not contest the Agency’s finding of discrimination, and we see
no reason to disturb it. The Agency’s finding of discrimination is affirmed.

Back pay

While Complainant characterizes lost overtime pay and bonuses as pecuniary damages, they are
wage-based compensation and fall under back pay. In reply to Complainant’s appeal, the Agency
argues that its FAD did not include an award of back pay, and Complainant’s appeal referenced,
but did not challenge that implicit denial. We disagree. While he mischaracterized lost overtime
pay and bonuses as pecuniary damages, Complainant on appeal challenged not receiving these
things. There is insufficient information in the record for the Commission to determine back pay
that may be due. This is addressed in the order below.

However, Complainant is not entitled to pier diem for work trips he did not take. Pier diem is
designed to cover the cost of a trip taken, and is not a form of compensation. Corazon P. v.
Homeland Security (FEMA), EEOC Petition No. 0420150004 (Oct. 26, 2016) (per diem is not
considered compensation under the Back Pay Act, 5 U.S.C. § 5596).

Compensatory damages

As applicable here, compensatory damages may be awarded for nonpecuniary losses that are
directly or proximately caused by the agency’s discriminatory conduct. Nonpecuniary losses are
intangible injuries not subject to precise quantification like emotional harm, suffering, loss of
health, and injury to reputation. Enforcement Guidance: Compensatory and Punitive Damages
Available Under Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (OLC Control No. EEOC-CVG-
1992-3; Jul. 14, 1992) (available at www.eeoc.gov).
                                               4                                    2020002347

We decline to consider reducing the amount of pecuniary compensatory damages awarded by the
Agency’s EEO function. We see no reason to accept an agency counsel’s challenge to the its
EEO function’s considered judgment, which is vested with the authority to make these
determinations, that a FAD’s award of pecuniary damages was too high.

Here, the discrimination that was found was the Agency not selecting Complainant on February
2, 2018, per his January 12, 2018 bid for reassignment. Complainant’s coworker attributed
Complainant’s injuries to a litany of alleged reprisals against Complainant over the last two
years, only one of which was found to be discriminatory in this case – the bid matter.
Complainant’s spouse attributed devastating effects to her husband over the past two years to
being subjected to a hostile work environment where he was disparately treated by his
supervisors and compelled to defend his professional reputation. The reference to reputation,
more likely than not, regards Complainant being investigated for misconduct, something on
which discrimination was not found in this case. And harassment more likely than not refers not
only to the bid matter.

But we agree with the FAD that to some extent Complainant’s emotional injury was caused by
the bid matter in view of his spouse’s statement that it caused him sleeplessness, and to be
increasingly irritable and withdrawn which alienated him from several close friends and family
members and placed a burdensome strain on his marriage.

Based on our review of the Commission’s caselaw, we find that Complainant is not entitled to
damages in excess of $10,000. Resnick v. Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 07A20040
(Oct. 30, 2003) (employee of the agency was subjected to reprisal discrimination when she was
not competitively selected for promotion. AJ’s award of $50,000 in nonpecuniary damages
reduced to $2,000 because Complainant did not show her injuries of depression, feeling
worthless, sleeplessness, negative changes in personality, reduced self-esteem, moodiness, and
becoming inward directed were caused by her non-selection as opposed to a myriad of other
alleged discriminatory acts she and her witnesses cited as causes for her injuries. At best,
Complainant showed she became upset and cried when she learned of her non-selection); Mica
B. v. GSA, EEOC Appeal Nos. 2019000424 & 2019001054 (Aug. 12, 2020) (employee of the
agency was subjected to disability discrimination when she was not selected for promotion, and
related because of this she experienced a downward spiral into depression and mental illness
based on the belief that she was unemployable due to her use of a wheelchair, her physical health
declined (not detailed by her medical evidence), and she had bouts of crying at work,
sleeplessness, and physical pain from her auto-immune disease. Awarded $10,000 in
nonpecuniary damages).

Attorney fees

As applicable to this case, EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1) states that reasonable
attorney fees incurred for work on a Title VII case, and a finding of discrimination raises a
presumption of entitlement to an award of fees paid by the agency.
                                                  5                                     2020002347

Attorney fees are allowable only for the services of members of the Bar and law clerks,
paralegals or law students under the supervision of members of the Bar. Id., at 501(e)(1)(iii).
Fees are only allowable for services performed after the written EEO complaint is filed and after
the attorney gives reasonable notice of representation to the agency, administrative judge or
Commission, except for reasonable time expended deciding to represent the complainant, and
another limited exception not applicable to this case. The request for fees must be accompanied
by an itemization of the charges for legal services. Id., at (2)(i). The amount of attorney's fees are
calculated by using the starting point of the number of hours reasonably expended multiplied by
a reasonable hourly rate. Id., at 2(B).

In support of his attorney fee request, Complainant submitted an invoice by Law Firm 1 to him
dated March 24, 2020, and a written receipt by Law Firm 1’s “Billing Supervisor” dated April 8,
2020, documenting his payments to it on April 5, 2018, May 25, 2018, and June 12, 2018. The
invoice does not identify by whom it was drafted, nor does the paperwork he submitted confirm
his case was worked on by an attorney who is a member of the Bar or people under the
supervision of a member of the Bar. As found by the FAD, there is no way to calculate
reasonable hourly fees or whether hours were reasonably expended without knowing what they
were. The record does not show Law Firm 1 gave notice of its representation, actual or
constructive. In fact, as argued by the Agency in its May 2020 and January 2021 replies to
Complainant’s appeals, Complainant has not shown he was represented at any point by Law
Firm 1. Specifically, he never submitted any paperwork prior to his request for attorney fees that
he was represented by Law Firm 1, and the complaint file contains no communications by Law
Firm 1. The receipt and invoice by Law Firm 1 identified the matter only as “[Complainant] v.
D.H.S. (U.S. Secret Service)”, and did not indicate it was this case. In an appellate declaration,
an EEO Specialist identified multiple other EEO cases by Complainant against the Agency. She
added the EEO office Complainant used has no record of a communication from anyone in Law
Firm 1 regarding this case. Counsel for the Agency represents in her appeal argument that she
had no communication with Law Firm 1 pertaining to this case. Complainant’s request for
attorney fees is denied.

The Agency’s finding of reprisal discrimination is AFFIRMED. Its finding awarding
Complainant $10,000 in nonpecuniary damages and denying all attorney fees by Law Firm 1 in
this case is AFFIRMED. Its finding in effect to not process Complainant’s back pay claim is
REVERSED.

                                         ORDER (D0617)

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial actions:

   1. If it has not already done so, within 60 calendar days of the date of this decision, the
      Agency shall make an offer to Complainant for the position of Criminal Investigator
      (Special Agent), GS-1811-13, at the Office of Investigations, Forensic Services Division,
      Polygraph Branch, Headquarters Quality Control/Operations in Washington, DC, or a
      substantially equivalent position.
                                                 6                                    2020002347

    2. The Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with interest, and other
       benefits due Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501, no later than sixty (60)
       calendar days after the date this decision was issued. Complainant shall cooperate in the
       Agency's efforts to compute the amount of back pay and benefits due, and shall provide
       all relevant information requested by the Agency. If there is a dispute regarding the exact
       amount of back pay and/or benefits, the Agency shall issue a check to Complainant for
       the undisputed amount within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Agency determines
       the amount it believes to be due. The Complainant may petition for enforcement or
       clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must
       be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled
       "Implementation of the Commission's Decision."

    3. If it has not already done so, within 60 calendar days from the date of this decision the
       Agency shall pay Complainant $10,000 in nonpecuniary damages.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision." The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617) 2

The Agency is ordered to post at its Office of Investigations, Forensic Services Division,
Polygraph Branch, Headquarters Quality Control/Operations in Washington, DC, copies of the
attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered,
defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the
Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's
Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in
digital format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).




2
 This posting order only applies if the posting directed in the March 30, 2020 FAD, at p. 8,       ¶
5 was not done.
                                                7                                     2020002347

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting
documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket
number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the
Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the
Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting
documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all
submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration.
                                               8                                    2020002347

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9      § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at:
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                9                                    2020002347

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 2, 2021
Date
