             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Adena J., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                     Merrick B. Garland,
                                       Attorney General,
                                    Department of Justice
                               (Federal Bureau of Investigation),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021003476

                                  Agency No. FBI-2021-00048

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission) from the Agency's final decision dated May 26, 2021, dismissing a formal
complaint alleging unlawful employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

During the relevant time, Complainant was an applicant with Salient CRGT (“Salient”), which
contracted with the Agency to supply various services.

On January 21, 2021, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
her to discrimination on the bases of race (African-American), sex (female) and age, as well as in
retaliation for complaints against the Agency involving the Prince George’s County Court
involving child custody/child support matters and the instant EEO complaint. The Agency
framed Complainant’s claims as follows:

           1. On January 7, 2021, Complainant received an offer for the position of
              Senior Technical Writer, which was rescinded on January 12, 2021.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                2021003476

           2. On January 27, 2021, Complainant was retaliated against for filing the
              instant EEO complaint when Salient reopened her background
              investigation to create an adverse action regarding her security clearance.

The Agency dismissed claim (1) for failure to state a claim. The Agency reasoned that
Complainant was neither an employee nor former FBI employee. In addition, the Agency
reasoned that there is “no indication that [Complainant has] ever been an applicant for FBI
employment.” Instead, according to the Agency, Complainant was an applicant of Salient and not
the Agency. Based on the foregoing, the Agency found that Complainant did not have standing
to bring the instant claim.

The Agency found that even assuming that Complainant did have standing to bring the instant
claim, claim (1) is still properly dismissed for failure to state a claim because Complainant has
not been rendered aggrieved. Specifically, the Agency stated “even assuming FBI officials
provided input to Salient that resulted in the rescission of [her] job offer, that action fails to state
a claim of discrimination.”

Regarding the basis of reprisal with respect to claim (1), the Agency found that Complainant was
not alleging complaints of employment discrimination, but complaints made as a private citizen
and thus did not constitute protected EEO activity.

The Agency treated claim (2) as an amendment to the instant formal complaint. The Agency
found claim (2) was like or related to the instant complaint but dismissed claim (2) for failure to
state a claim again reasoning that Complainant was not an employee, former employee, or
applicant for employment with the Agency. Thus, the Agency found, like claim (1), that
Complainant did not have standing to bring this claim. The Agency further found that even
assuming Complainant did have standing to bring claim (2), it fails to state a claim because the
alleged action would not have reasonably deterred one from participating in the EEO process.

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant asserts that the Agency was a joint
employer with Salient for EEO purposes. Complainant asserts that “the Agency’s power to
remove Complainant was tantamount to removal from her position of employment with
Salient…” Complainant also submits some documentation regarding the position at issue.

                                   ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Joint Employer Status

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(a) provides that complaints of employment
discrimination shall be processed in accordance with Part 1614 of the EEOC regulations. The
regulation goes on to state that within the covered departments, agencies, and units, Part 1614
applies to all employees and applicants for employment. See 29 § 1614.103(c).
                                              3                              2021003476

In Serita B. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150846 (Nov. 10, 2016), the
Commission reaffirmed its long-standing position on “joint employers” and noted it is found in
numerous sources. See, e.g., EEOC Compliance Manual Section 2, “Threshold Issues,” Section
2-III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) (May 12, 2000) (Compliance Manual), EEOC Enforcement Guidance:
Application of EEO Laws to Contingent Workers Placed by Temporary Employment Agencies
and Other Staffing Firms (Dec. 3, 1997) (Enforcement Guidance), “Coverage Issues,” Question
2; Ma v. Dep't of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 & 01962390 (May
29, 1998). We reiterate the analysis set forth in those decisions and guidance documents in this
decision.

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each exercise sufficient control
of an individual to qualify as the worker's employer. Compliance Manual, Section 2-
III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). To determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise sufficient control,
EEOC considers factors derived from common law principles of agency. See Enforcement
Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2. EEOC considers, inter alia, the Agency's right to
control when, where, and how the worker performs the job; the right to assign additional projects
to the worker; whether the work is performed on Agency premises; whether the Agency provides
the tools, material, and equipment to perform the job; the duration of the relationship between
the Agency and the worker whether the Agency controls the worker's schedule; and whether the
Agency can discharge the worker. EEOC Compliance Manual, Section 2-III(A)(1)
(citing Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318, 323-24 (1992)); EEOC v. Skanska
USA Bldg., Inc., 550 F.App'x 253, 256 (6th Cir. 2013) (“Entities are joint employers if they
‘share or co-determine those matters governing essential terms and conditions of employment”’)
(quoting Carrier Corp. v. NLRB, 768 F.2d 778, 781 (6th Cir. 1985); see also Ma, EEOC Appeal
Nos. 01962389 & 01962390.

On the factor of the right to control when, where, and how the worker performs the job and to
assign additional projects, complete agency control is not required. Rather, the control may be
partial or joint and still point to joint employment. Shorter v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120131148 (June 11, 2013) (where both staffing firm and agency made
assignments, this pointed to joint employment); Complainant v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120143162 (May 20, 2015), request for reconsideration denied, EEOC Request No.
0520150430 (Mar. 11, 2016) (where staffing firm wrote and issued complainant's appraisal with
input from agency, this pointed toward joint employment). Likewise, where both the agency and
staffing firm provided tools, material, and equipment to perform the job, this pointed to joint
employment. Elkin v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120122211, 2012 WL 5818075
(Nov. 8, 2012). Similarly, where a staffing firm terminates a worker after an agency
communicates it no longer wants the worker's services, this supports a finding that the agency
has joint or de facto power to discharge the worker. See, e.g., Complainants v. Dep't of Justice,
EEOC Appeal Nos. 0120141963 & 0120141762 (Jan. 28, 2015); see also Skanska USA Bldg.,
Inc., 550 Fed. App'x at 254, 256 (where defendant removed staffing firm's workers from job site
without challenge from staffing firm, and after such removals staffing firm generally fired
worker, this pointed to joint employment); Butler v. Drive Auto. Indus. of America, Inc., 793
F.3d 404, 414-15 (4th Cir. 2015). The EEOC considers an entity's right to control the terms and
                                               4                               2021003476

conditions of employment, whether or not it exercises that right, as relevant to joint employer
status. Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2, Example 5 (where an entity
reserves the right to direct the means and manner of an individual's work, but does not generally
exercise that right, the entity may still be found to be a joint employer).

In assessing the right to control, EEOC does not consider any one factor to be decisive and
emphasizes that it is not necessary to satisfy a majority of the factors. In particular, the fact that
an individual performs work pursuant to a contract between the federal government and an
outside organization and is paid and provided with benefits by that organization, on its own, is
not enough to show that joint employment does not exist. Rather, the analysis is holistic.

       Claim (1)

The record is not sufficiently developed to make a reasoned determination as to whether the
Agency is a joint employer for the purpose of using the 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 EEO complaint
process. Specifically, the record is devoid of evidence that the Agency performed any
inquiry/analysis on the position at issue and the Agency’s possible joint employer status for EEO
purposes. The complaint file does not contain a copy of the contract between the Agency and
Salient, a position description for the position at issue, or any affidavits or documentation
regarding the selection/application process. 2

We acknowledge that Complainant, on appeal, submits some documentation regarding the
position at issue. Complainant submits a letter dated January 7, 2021, from Salient extending an
employment offer for the position of Senior Technical Writer. The letter sets forth that her
employment is contingent upon various requirements including “customer approval from FBI.”
Complainant also submits, as part of her appeal, a letter from Salient dated January 12, 2021,
rescinding its January 7, 2021 employment offer. Finally, Complainant submits a copy of an
email from an official with Salient. Therein, the Salient official asserts that it engaged in a
review of the circumstances that led to the rescission of Complainant’s job offer. The email from
Salient states, in pertinent part, “[Complainant was] issued an offer contingent upon approval of
[Visitor Access Request] and FBI Customer Approval. On January 12, 2021, the hiring manager
for the position notified [Salient] that [Complainant] had not been approved by the FBI
Customer, which was one of the contingencies in [her] offer letter.”

Based on the foregoing and the record not being adequately developed, the Agency shall conduct
an inquiry regarding its possible joint employer status for the position at issue by considering the
factors discussed above. The Agency shall supplement the record with relevant documentation,
as set forth in the Order below, including the documentation already submitted by Complainant,
as referenced above.



2
 We note that, in this case, control over hiring is an especially significant factor in making a
determination on joint employment.
                                               5                              2021003476

Finally, assuming arguendo that the Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes, we find that
Complainant set forth an actionable claim in claim (1) by alleging that her offer was rescinded
based upon instruction from the Agency due to her race, sex or age.

       Claim (2)

As set forth in our discussion of claim (1), the record is not fully developed to make a
determination regarding the Agency’s possible joint employer status and thus we also remand
this issue for a supplemental investigation, as set forth in the Order below.

Assuming that the Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes, we find that Complainant has
set forth a sufficient claim with respect to the basis of reprisal. Regarding claim (2),
Complainant is alleging that, at the Agency’s instruction and due to her initial filing the instant
EEO complaint, Salient opened a background investigation (after rescinding her job offer) in
order for Complainant to have an adverse action on her security clearance.

While the Commission will not review the substance of security clearance decisions, it has
authority to review an Agency’s decision to initiate review of a Complainant’s security clearance
status, as this decision is not the result of any substantive clearance decision-making process.
Chatlin v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05900188 (June 1, 1990); Anderson v. Dep’t
of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120092413 (Oct. 16, 2009).

The Commission has a policy of considering reprisal claims with a broad view of
coverage. See Carroll v. Department of the Army, EEOC Request No. 05970939 (April 4, 2000).
Under Commission policy, claimed retaliatory actions which can be challenged are not restricted
to those which affect a term or condition of employment. Rather, a complainant is protected from
any discrimination that is reasonably likely to deter protected activity. See EEOC Compliance
Manual Section 8, “Retaliation,” No. 915.003 (May 20, 1998; at 8-15; see also Carroll. We have
found that initiating a security clearance investigation to allegedly retaliate against an individual
would reasonably likely deter protected activity. See Complainant v. Dep’t of Energy, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120141119 (July 9, 2014), req. to recons. den., EEOC Request No. 0520140497
(April 8, 2016).

Basis of Reprisal – Court Matters

To the extent Complainant is alleging, in claim (1), that the Agency retaliated against her based
on prior complaints that she submitted to the FBI regarding child custody/child support matters
involving the courts in Prince George’s County, Maryland, we concur with the Agency that this
matter does not constitute prior protected EEO activity. The EEO Counselor’s Report provides,
in pertinent part, that Complainant was in contact with various named Agency officials
“regarding her claims the Prince George’s Family Court harassed her and her family.
[Complainant] stated in 2012, she requested and received information regarding her FBI
complaint against Prince George’s Family Court via a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
request, which she stated revealed [a named Agency official] advised that there was no federal
                                              6                               2021003476

nexus for [Complainant’s] complaint and never opened an investigation. [Complainant] stated in
2014, she contacted the Office of Inspector General (OIG) regarding her complaint against
Prince George’s Family Court and misconduct at the Agency’s Baltimore [Field Office] for not
investigating her complaint of concealment of financial crime and the State courts conspiring
against federal rights.” We find that the foregoing does not constitute protected EEO activity.
Instead, this activity constitutes non-EEO complaints filed by Complainant in her capacity as a
private citizen.

However, to the extent Complainant is alleging that the Agency retaliated against Complainant
with respect to claim (2) based on initiating the instant EEO complaint, which was filed before
she alleged her background investigation was reopened, we find that this constitutes protected
EEO activity.
                                         CONCLUSION

We AFFIRM the Agency’s dismissal of the basis of reprisal to the extent Complainant is
alleging retaliation for filing non-EEO complaints with the Agency in her capacity as a private
citizen. However, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision dismissing the remainder of the
complaint and we REMAND this matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation as set
forth in the ORDER below.
                                           ORDER

Within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall:

       1. Conduct a supplemental investigation to obtain evidence consistent with this decision
          and relevant in assessing whether the Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes.
          The evidentiary record shall include, but is not limited to the following: the
          documentation Complainant previously submitted on this issue as referenced in this
          decision, the contract between Salient and the Agency, a position description for the
          position at issue, and affidavits from relevant Salient officials, Complainant, and
          relevant Agency officials pertaining to the circumstances surrounding the rescission
          of Complainant’s job offer and the subsequent reopening of her background
          investigation. A copy of the completed investigation shall be provided to
          Complainant.

       2. Thereafter, the Agency shall either issue a new final decision dismissing the
          complaint, with an appropriate analysis of the relevant facts and with appeal rights to
          the Commission, or a letter accepting Complainant’s complaint for investigation.

       3. A copy of the supplemental investigation and final decision or letter of acceptance
          shall be provided to the Compliance Officer as set forth below.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
                                              7                              2021003476

corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                             8                             2021003476

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
                                             9                               2021003476

request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


____________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 18, 2021
Date
