              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                          Anastacia D., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                        William P. Barr,
                                        Attorney General,
                                      Department of Justice
                                   (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                             Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019002640

                                  Hearing No. 430-2018-0043X

                                  Agency No. BOP-2016-01024

                                           DECISION

On April 2, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
March 1, 2019, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination based on reprisal for her protected EEO activity.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Specialist at the
Federal Correctional Complex in Butner, North Carolina.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019002640

On September 30, 2016, Complainant filed an EEO complaint, which she later amended, alleging
that the Agency subjected her to discrimination on the basis of reprisal for her prior protected EEO
activity when she received a Satisfactory rating for Element 5 on her evaluation which covered the
first quarter (April - June 2016). Complainant alleged that this was lower than her previous rating
for that element. In Complainant’s accepted amendment, she further alleged that her second quarter
evaluation, dated October 7, 2016, remained at Satisfactory.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claim.
During the relevant time, her first line supervisor and Rating Official was the Assistant Supervisor
of Education (S1). Complainant stated that S1 provided her with a Satisfactory rating for Element
5, Maintain Security of the Institution, for the quarter ending in June 2016. Complainant asserted
that this was lower than her prior rating in the same element. Complainant believed that rating was
given because of her EEO activity. Complainant met with the Supervisor of Education (S2), who
was the Reviewing Official, and the Warden to discuss the rating. S2 informed Complainant to
raise her concerns with S1. Complainant believes the Warden later informed S1 to change the
rating. However, Complainant believed that S1 and S2 intentionally left her rating lower.
Complainant asserted that the entry was not changed to Excellent until October 2016.

S2 stated that Complainant’s rating was marked as Satisfactory due to her performance and denied
that the rating was affected by Complainant’s EEO activity. S1 stated that the Satisfactory rating
was based on performance, and not Complainant’s EEO activity. S1 stated that she provides all
employees an opportunity to contest ratings, and after further evaluation, she considers making
adjustments. S1 stated that Complainant, and other employees, have previously requested
evaluation reconsiderations. Management stated that after discussion and consideration,
Complainant’s rating was changed from Satisfactory to Excellent.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing, but the
AJ cancelled the hearing and remanded the matter for a final Agency decision (FAD). The Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant asserts that the Agency failed to take into consideration several
evidentiary facts. Complainant then listed several examples of how the manager allegedly
retaliated against her, such as non-selections, time and attendance, and more. Many of the listed
examples were not related to the issue at hand.

The Agency noted that the appellate statement provided several allegations that were not related
to the claim at issue and were not raised previously. The Agency stated that the FAD discussed at
length how Complainant failed to demonstrate that management discriminated against her on the
basis of reprisal for engaging in EEO activity.
                                                 3                                      2019002640

The Agency argued that Complainant failed, below and on appeal, to produce evidence that
established the Agency’s stated, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions were pretextual.

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-
110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of
the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony
of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As a preliminary matter, we note that for the first time on appeal, Complainant addresses several
matters that were not raised in her formal complaint. Therefore, we will not consider it here. If
Complainant wishes to pursue additional matters of alleged discrimination, she is advised to
contact an Agency EEO Counselor.

Disparate Treatment Discrimination Because Of Reprisal

Complainant can establish a prima facie case of reprisal discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination. Shapiro v. Social Sec.
Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996) (citing McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792, 802 (1973)). Specifically, in a reprisal claim, and in accordance with the burdens
set forth in McDonnell Douglas. Hochstadt v. Worcester Found. for Experimental Biology, 425 F.
Supp. 318, 324 (D. Mass.), aff'd, 545 F.2d 222 (1st Cir. 1976), and Coffman v. Dep’t of Veteran
Affairs, EEOC Request No. 05960473 (Nov. 20, 1997), a Complainant may establish a prima facie
case of reprisal by showing that: (1) he or she engaged in a protected activity; (2) the agency was
aware of the protected activity; (3) subsequently, he or she was subjected to adverse treatment by
the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected activity and the adverse
treatment. Whitmire v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000).

The Commission has stated that adverse actions need not qualify as “ultimate employment actions”
or materially affect the terms and conditions of employment to constitute retaliation. EEOC
Compliance Manual Section 8: Retaliation, No. 915.003, at 8-15 (May 20, 1998); see Burlington
N. and Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53 (2006) (finding that the anti-retaliation provision
protects individuals from a retaliatory action that a reasonable person would have found
“materially adverse,” which in the retaliation context means that the action might have deterred a
reasonable person from opposing discrimination or participating in the EEO process).
                                                4                                     2019002640

Analysis

We assume that Complainant established a prima facie case of reprisal discrimination. See Wells
v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00032 (2000) (noting that in cases where
there has been an investigation and the agency articulates a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for its employment decision, the establishment of a prima facie case becomes irrelevant because
there is enough evidence to make a decision based on the merits) (citing U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of
Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711 (1983)).

Having assumed that Complainant has established a prima facie case of reprisal discrimination,
we find that the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
Specifically, that the rating initially provided was based on Complainant’s performance, and not
her prior EEO activity. Additionally, like other employees, Complainant was provided with an
opportunity to contest the rating. After Complainant requested a review of the rating, S1 changed
the rating to Excellent as requested by Complainant. Here the record demonstrates that the Element
was marked as E for Excellent for the rating period of April to June 2016. The evaluation form
noted that the rating was updated on October 6, 2016. The record also demonstrates that the same
element was also marked as E for the July to September 2016 rating period.

Moreover, we agree with the Agency that the action of having her Element marked as Satisfactory
for several months was minimal harm to Complainant. Furthermore, we find insufficient evidence
in the record to support a finding of discrimination based on reprisal because Complainant
ultimately failed to establish a nexus between the protected activity and the adverse action of
having her element marked as Satisfactory. In sum, the evidence does not support a finding of
discrimination on any basis, or the presence of retaliatory animus.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding of no discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.    The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
              law; or

       2.    The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
              operations of the Agency.
                                                   5                                      2019002640

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for reconsideration in
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the Director, Office of Federal
Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Complainant’s request may be
submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail to 131
M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, the request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The agency’s request must be submitted
in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration as
untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  6                                     2019002640

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 30, 2020
Date
