                U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                              Office of Federal Operations
                                     P.O. Box 77960
                                Washington, DC 20013


                                             Phyllis F., 1
                                            Complainant,

                                                  v.

                                      Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                             Secretary,
                                 Department of Homeland Security
                              (Transportation Security Administration),
                                              Agency.

                                      Appeal No. 0120150799

                                  Hearing No. 430-2014-00176X 2

                                 Agency No. HS-TSA-01100-2013

                                             DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 24, 2014, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission REVERSES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the matter in accordance
with the ORDER below.

                                        ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s decision finding that Complainant did not establish that she was subjected
to a hostile work environment on the bases of her sexual orientation or retaliation is supported by
the preponderance of the evidence in the record.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
    Complainant initially requested a hearing, but subsequently withdrew her request.
                                                2                                    0120150799

                                  FACTUAL BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was serving in her probationary
period as a Part Time Transportation Screening Officer (TSO) at the Pitt-Greenville Airport in
Greenville, North Carolina.

In her complaint, Complainant alleged that a co-worker (TSO1) made several comments towards
her about her sexual orientation which created a hostile work environment. Specifically,
Complainant asserted that on February 13, 2013, while looking at a picture of her dogs, TSO1
approached her and said, “You are never going to have a man in your life as long as you have those
two dogs.” Complainant claimed that these types of comments occurred weekly, but that she did
not complain about this incident immediately. Complainant further asserted that, on March 26,
2013, TSO1 interrupted a conversation she was having with another co-worker and stated, “You
know they can mess around and have sex and do what they want I don’t care, but I do not think
same-sex couples should be allowed to get married.”

Complainant alleged that she and another TSO (TSO2) raised the issue with their second-level
supervisor, a Transportation Security Manager (TSM), and scheduled a meeting to discuss it.
However, TSM cancelled the meeting and Complainant went to her union representative instead.
Report of Investigation (ROI) at 340-341. Complainant did not hear back from her TSM about the
incident until August 2013.

Complainant also asserted that on March 30, 2013, a co-worker (TSO3) informed her that she had
overheard TSO1 and Complainant’s first-line supervisor, a Supervisory Transportation Screening
Officer (STSO), having a conversation about the sexual orientation of two officers. TSO3 advised
Complainant that she heard her name mentioned in the conversation. Complainant averred that,
after this event, she did not feel comfortable going to STSO about that harassment because he had
informed TSO1 about her complaints. ROI at 347. Complainant averred she informed TSM about
this incident as well.

Both STSO and TSM averred that the March 30, 2013 incident occurred while counseling TSO1
about the earlier statements. TSO1 responded to the allegation by averring that she was not aware
of Complainant’s sexual orientation at the time she made these comments.

The record contains corroborating testimony of TSO1’s comments. TSO3 averred that she heard
TSO1 make statements like this in the past and that it was clear that Complainant and TSO2 were
offended by them. ROI at 541. She also averred that TSO1 made additional comments even after
being told that they were offensive, and that management did not do anything to fix the hostile
work environment. ROI at 553, 543. Another co-worker (TSO4) also averred that she believed
that Complainant was being targeted because of her sexual orientation and EEO activity. ROI at
560, 566, 558.
                                                  3                                     0120150799

Complainant asserted that management and her co-workers were aware of her complaints to
management in March 2013, and they began retaliating against her for having complained. She
contacted an EEO Counselor on April 2, 2013. Complainant stated that on April 7, 2013, TSO1
refused to take a bag that Complainant was passing to her until she placed it on the floor first and
stated to Complainant that she “would not want to touch your hands and you report me for
harassment.” ROI at 347. TSO1 does not dispute saying this. ROI at 531. Complainant also stated
that in April 2013, TSO1 prohibited her from accessing and screening luggage, which was her
assignment at the time. Complainant averred that, after this incident, she went to the checkpoint
to work and informed the Lead TSO (LTSO1) about the incident. When TSO1 came back upstairs
to the checkpoint, TSO1 allegedly remarked that she was “going to file an EEO complaint against
[Complainant] because I did not do anything and she filed one against me.” ROI at 349. In
response to this allegation, TSM averred that STSO counseled TSO1 about the incident and told
her to stop the childish behavior because there were clearly issues between the two. In his affidavit,
STSO averred it was merely a communication problem. ROI at p. 439, 457. However, TSO3
averred that she believed that this incident occurred because Complainant was pursuing the option
of an EEO complaint. ROI at 545.

Although the record reveals that management sent an email on May 21, 2013, advising employees
to be respectful of people’s orientations, Complainant asserted that the Agency’s efforts at ending
the harassment were not sufficient. Complainant recalled requesting to be separated from TSO1
starting in March 2013, but she was informed that the airport was too small and only had one
checkpoint, which would make such accommodation impossible. Complainant also averred that
she asked TSM if she could get a transfer away from the harassment, but that TSM informed her
that she had not been at the facility a year, which was required by the Collective Bargaining
Agreement (CBA). TSM did not dispute this testimony and STSO averred that he did not
remember Complainant asking for a transfer. STSO averred that he does not remember if
Complainant asked to be separated or transferred. ROI at 440.

Complainant alleged that, in the meantime, the harassment continued. She claimed that on May
27, 2013, TSO1 remarked:

       Those girls never told me they were gay, I could not tell by looking at them. I have a sister
       who is gay, and I don’t agree with her lifestyle, I still do not think gay people should be
       allowed to get married, I don’t believe in it. I do not know why those girls still have a
       problem with me.

ROI at 352.

In response, Complainant met with STSO and informed him that the comments were continuing,
and that then-President Obama had advised that employees were entitled to equal rights in the
workplace regardless of sexual orientation. In response, STSO told her that she should not discuss
politics at work. ROI at 354. In an affidavit, TSO1 denied making this statement in front of
Complainant. ROI at 533. STSO averred that he did not remember the incident.
                                                4                                    0120150799

When asked what actions he took in response to Complainant’s allegations, STSO averred that he
conducted daily shift briefings on hostile work environment, but he did not remember if he offered
any preventative or corrective actions. ROI at 444.

Complainant also alleged that the Agency continued to retaliate against her in her performance
rating when on July 7, 2013, she received only “Achieved Expectations” instead of “Exceeds
Expectations.” Complainant claimed that she should have received a higher rating because she
had a clean disciplinary record and took on extra assignments. She further alleged that others did
not perform extra assignments but received higher ratings. Complaint averred that when she asked
STSO about her rating, she was told that she received a “3” for “Achieved Expectations” because
she lacked experience. ROI at 358. Complainant then raised the matter with TSM, who changed
the rating to an “Exceeded Expectations.” TSM averred that he changed the rating when
Complainant presented him with a list of her accomplishments. ROI at 461.

Complainant also claimed she was subjected to reprisal when she was not afforded advanced notice
of overtime opportunities and was subjected to excess scrutiny at the checkpoint from the LTSO,
which was embarrassing. TSO3 corroborated Complainant’s testimony. ROI at 549-50.

Complainant continued to revisit her transfer request with TSM at her one-year anniversary.
However, in August 2013, TSM informed Complainant that she had to apply through the National
Voluntary Transfer Program. TSM also advised her that staffing levels were low and that any
decision as to whether she could be transferred would need to take staffing levels into
consideration. ROI at 404. Complainant stated that another female transferred to another airport
but that management did not permit Complainant to do so.

Complainant also complained about the harassment to her third-level supervisor, the Assistant
Federal Security Director (AFSD) in Raleigh, North Carolina. The record contains an August 14,
2013 email from Complainant to AFSD asking her for assistance. In the email, Complainant
alerted AFSD to the harassment and her EEO complaint. Complainant also informed her that she
had completed the National Voluntary Transfer application and requested a transfer to Santa
Barbara, where there was an opening. AFSD inquired as to whether Complainant had been
separated from the harasser and informed her that her transfer request would be investigated. ROI
at 402. Complainant informed AFSD that she never received a response from TSM regarding her
allegations and AFSD said she would follow up.

A few days later, on August 22, 2013, TSM sent Complainant a memo regarding her EEO
allegations. Therein, TSM reported that he had completed an inquiry into Complainant’s EEO
complaint and he was able to substantiate only one incident because of a lack of corroborating
evidence. He said the matter would be addressed with appropriate disciplinary action. However,
there is no evidence that any disciplinary action was taken against TSO1 or any other individual.

In response to Complainant’s allegations, AFSD averred that she contacted TSM in August 2013,
and she was satisfied that he had dealt with the situation.
                                                 5                                     0120150799

She added that she visited the Greenville, North Carolina facility in person on September 6, 2013,
to discuss standards of conduct with Complainant and others. She also informed Complainant
about the process of obtaining a transfer through the CBA. She noted that it was her belief that
Complainant reacted negatively whenever she was with TSO1, and that Complainant was overly
sensitive. She concluded that inappropriate comments were made, but there was insufficient
evidence that TSO1 did this with intent to offend Complainant, and that “it is reasonable to believe
that [TSO1] and [Complainant] have generational differences.” ROI at 497. With regard to
separating Complainant and TSO1, she noted that because the airport had only one checkpoint it
would be difficult to separate Complainant from TSO1.

Despite AFSD’s visit to the facility, Complainant claimed that TSO1’s harassment continued
through the fall of 2013, in retaliation for filing a complaint. The record reveals that on October
19, 2013, Complainant contacted AFSD again about the harassment and “mental intimidation.”
ROI at 715. In her email, Complainant again requested a transfer to get away from the harassment.
AFSD again referred Complainant to the CBA and stated that she would have TSM speak with
Complainant. ROI at 716. Complainant advised AFSD that she heard other TSOs and LTSO
discussing whether they could have Complainant disciplined for having an attitude toward
superiors. ROI at 719.

Two incidents occurred on October 23, 2013, which ultimately led to Complainant’s termination.
Complainant claimed that at around 1:30-2:00 p.m., TSO1 made snide comments about her in front
of passengers and tried to intimidate her. As a result, Complainant averred, she left her post
because she was no longer felt comfortable working alongside TSO1. Complainant informed her
Lead TSO (LTSO2) about the incident and then phoned TSM. Complainant averred that TSM
assured her she would not have to work with TSO1 again, and she should come back in time for
the next flight, approximately 2 hours later, when TSO1 would not be working. TSM’s testimony
does not dispute this; rather, he averred that he told Complainant to come back two hours later and
that he “gave her a pass” for the first incident. ROI at 1030.

Complainant averred that the second incident occurred soon after she returned around 4:00 p.m.
She stated that to her surprise, TSO1 was at the US Airways counter, out of uniform. Complainant
again believed that she was being intimidated and left the building. Complainant contacted her
LTSO and TSM again and informed them that she did not feel safe and was going to see her doctor.
At this point, TSM told Complainant she was acting like a baby and that she should return
immediately. Complainant averred that she returned about 30 minutes later.

Complainant was charged with 3.15 hours of Absence without Official Leave (AWOL). Soon
thereafter, on October 31, 2013, AFSD scheduled a meeting to discuss the AWOL charge, but
Complainant did not have time to confer with her union representative. The meeting was
rescheduled to November 6, 2013, but Complainant averred she did not have representation.
Complainant alleged that during that meeting, AFSD informed Complainant that her complaints
were a distraction to security and that they did not believe her harassment allegations. ROI at 375,
697. AFSD averred that Complainant was terminated because management had lost confidence in
her ability to perform the job and because she presented a security risk when she left her post.
                                                6                                     0120150799

Complainant claimed that she was retaliated against when she was issued the AWOL and
termination charges. She denied being absent for 3 hours and 15 minutes and alleged that others
have been late for work or have walked off the job but were not similarly disciplined. TSM denied
that others were treated more favorably when they were AWOL. However, TSO3 averred that
TSO1 was AWOL many times and was not disciplined. ROI at 551.

Complainant also claimed that at this time a transfer to Santa Barbara was in the works, but on
November 6, 2013, she was terminated. AFSD averred that Complainant was not eligible for a
transfer because of the AWOL charge.

                               PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On July 16, 2013, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her based on her sex (female, lesbian), 3 and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
when:

       1. On February 18, 2013, TSO1 told Complainant, “You are never going to have a man
          in your life as long as you have those two dogs,” and “You need a man in your life in
          order for you to be happy and being here in Greenville is not where you’re going to
          find one.”

       2. On March 26, 2013, TSO1 interrupted Complainant’s conversation with a third party
          and stated, “You know, they can mess around and have sex and do what they want, I
          don’t care, but I do not think same sex couples should be allowed to get married.”

       3. On March 29, 2013, TSM told Complainant that he was too busy to meet with her to
          discuss the situation between Complainant and TSO1.

       4. On March 30, 2013, another co-worker informed Complainant that TSO1 mentioned
          Complainant in a conversation about the sexual orientation of two officers.

       5. On April 7, 2013, TSO1 placed a bag on the floor, instead of handing it to Complainant
          and stated, “I would not want to touch your hands and have you report me for
          harassment.”

       6. On April 16, 2013, TSO1 did not let Complainant screen any bags and yelled at her.




3
  In Bostock v. Clayton County, the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual
orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590 U.S. ___, 140 S. Ct. 1731
(2020); see also Baldwin v. Dep’t of Transportation, EEOC Appeal No. 0120133080 (July 15,
2015) (an allegation of discrimination based on sexual orientation states a claim of sex
discrimination under Title VII because sexual orientation is inherently a sex-based consideration).
                                                7                                    0120150799

       7. On May 27, 2013, TSO1 stated in Complainant’s presence, “Those girls never told me
          they were gay. I could not tell by looking at them. I have a sister who is gay, and I
          don’t agree with her lifestyle. I still do not think gay people should be allowed to get
          married. I don’t believe in it. I do not know why those girls still have a problem with
          me.”

Complainant also alleged that the Agency discriminated against her and subjected her to a hostile
work environment based on sex (female, lesbian) and in reprisal (instant complaint) when:

       8. Beginning in April 2013 to present, Complainant did not receive advanced notice to
          come in for extra hours like other TSOs received.

       9. On June 2, 2013, Complainant related the incidents of May 27, 2013, to STSO, and
          when she said that President Obama stated that employees are entitled to equal rights
          in the workplace regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity, STSO warned
          Complainant not to talk about politics at work.

       10. On July 7, 2013, S1 rated Complainant as “Achieved Expectations” while rating
           another TSO as “Exceeds Expectations.”

       11. On August 29, 2013, LTSO1 tried to embarrass Complainant when he stated, “I need
           to come over and look at the X-Ray to see what [Complainant] just called a bag check
           on to make sure it was necessary,” and implied that Complainant was a child by asking
           if she needed to go the break room for a nap and snack.

       12. On September 8, 2013, TSO1 entered the training room and disturbed Complainant’s
           work by talking loudly on the phone, and she only ceased her behavior after
           Complainant reported her to LTSO2.

       13. On October 22, 2013, LTSO1 stood directly behind Complainant while she was
           working the X-ray machine to correct her, to show his authority and embarrass her in
           front of other TSOs and passengers.

       14. On October 23, 2013, TSO1 interrupted Complainant’s conversation with a US
           Airways employee and gave her a look of contempt, which Complainant alleged is
           evidence of stalking, intimidation and scare tactics.

       15. On October 31, 2013, AFSD scheduled an AWOL meeting with Complainant, but did
           not allow her time to find representation.

       16. On November 6, 2013, Complainant received a notice of “Termination during Trial
           Period,” effective November 1, 2013.
                                                 8                                      0120150799

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but
subsequently withdrew her request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In its final decision, the Agency found that Complainant had not established her claims of
discrimination. The Agency then addressed Complainant’s disparate treatment claims, and it
determined that she failed to present evidence of similarly situated individuals who were treated
more favorably. The Agency also concluded that Complainant failed to establish that the Agency’s
reasons for its actions were a pretext for discrimination. Specifically, the Agency found no
evidence that Complainant was denied additional overtime hours. Further, the Agency found no
evidence that Complainant received a discriminatory rating since her rating was eventually raised
after she complained. Finally, the Agency found Complainant was issued an AWOL charge and
terminated from her position because she left her job twice in one day and presented a security
risk.

The Agency also concluded that Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to a hostile
work environment. The Agency found that TSM and AFSD both investigated Complainant’s
allegations and informed all TSOs that they should abide by acceptable standards of conduct. The
Agency determined that even if TSO1 made the February 18, 2013, and March 26, 2013,
statements, she was not aware of Complainant’s sexual orientation at the time she made the
statements; further, the March 30, 2013 statement was made during a counseling session between
STSO and TSO1. The Agency found that the remaining allegations did not occur as alleged or
were not harassing. In sum, the Agency concluded that Complainant had not proved that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant argues that the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment based
on her sexual orientation when TSO1 made comments regarding Complainant’s failure to conform
to traditional female stereotypes. She asserts that these comments became pervasive in the
workplace and went unaddressed by management. Complainant argues that management
conducted only a verbal counseling of TSO1, which was insufficient. She submits evidence on
appeal from AFSD suggesting that TSM’s response was not an appropriate response to the
harassment. Complainant claims that she sought a transfer to another airport to escape the
harassment but was not allowed to transfer. Ultimately, Complainant asserts the harassment got
so bad she was forced to leave her post, but she denies doing so for three hours. In that regard, she
asserts others were also AWOL but were not similarly disciplined. Complainant also claims that
she was subjected to retaliation when the Greenville Human Resources Office informed the Santa
Barbara airport about her pending removal and EEO activity, and that the Agency failed to provide
Complainant with a safe and discrimination-free workplace.
                                                9                                     0120150799

In response, the Agency first takes issue with the new documents Complainant submitted on appeal
and claims they should not be made part of the record. The Agency contends that the documents
were produced to or by Complainant during discovery while the case was initially before an EEOC
AJ. The Agency asserts that Complainant cannot show that the evidence was not reasonably
available during the hearing process and that she abandoned the hearing process without making
them part of the record.

The Agency also argues that Complainant’s disparate treatment claims fail because she did not
identify similarly situated individuals who were treated more favorably. Further, it asserts that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency’s reasons for terminating her were a pretext because
the evidence revealed that Complainant walked off the job and created a security vulnerability.
Accordingly, because of this discipline, Complainant was not available for transfer and her EEO
activity played no part in the denial of transfer. Regarding the harassment claim, the Agency
contends that the conduct was neither severe nor pervasive enough to constitute a hostile work
environment, and it was not shown to be related to Complainant’s sex, sexual orientation, or prior
EEO activity.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chap. 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Harassment Claims

To establish a claim of harassment a complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).

Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).
                                                10                                    0120150799

The harasser’s conduct should be evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person
in the victim’s circumstances. Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc.
(Enforcement Guidance), EEOC Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994). In determining that a
working environment is hostile, factors to consider are the frequency of the alleged discriminatory
conduct, its severity, whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, and if it unreasonably
interferes with an employee’s work performance. See Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. at
17, 21 (1993); Enforcement Guidance at 6. The Supreme Court has stated that: “Conduct that is
not severe or pervasive enough to create an objectively hostile work environment - an environment
that a reasonable person would find hostile or abusive - is beyond Title VII’s purview.” Harris v.
Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. at 22 (1993).

After a review of the record, we conclude that Complainant was subjected to harassment because
of her sex because she was subjected to severe or pervasive comments which were premised on
her sex; the sex of people she associated with; and included sex-based preferences, assumptions,
expectations, stereotypes or norms. The record reveals that starting in February 2013, TSO1 made
several offensive comments towards Complainant about her sexual orientation and suggested that
she needed a man in her life. Complainant later overheard STSO and TSO1 discussing the
incident, and TSO1 again remarked about gay marriage. Complainant also found this was
offensive. TSO1 continued to make her disapproval of homosexuality and gay marriage known in
May 2013. Complainant understood that TSO1 did not approve of her “lifestyle” and became
fearful when working with TSO1, and thus the conduct unreasonably interfered with her work
performance. Complainant has met her burden of establishing that she was subjected to a hostile
work environment because of her sex.

Additionally, we also find Complainant has met her burden of proving she was subjected to
retaliation because she complained about the harassment. Soon after Complainant complained in
March 2013, co-workers and supervisors retaliated against her and subjected her to severe or
pervasive comments, as well as humiliating conduct, about her EEO activity. For example, on one
occasion, TSO1 refused to pass Complainant luggage without setting it on the floor first because
she “would not want to touch [Complainant’s] hands and have [Complainant] report [TSO1] for
harassment.” TSO1 also interfered with her work by limiting Complainant’s access to luggage so
she could not perform her assignment. Complainant’s own supervisor, STSO, told her not to
complain about EEO matters because she should not discuss politics at work. There is also
evidence corroborating Complainant’s claim that she was not provided opportunities for extra
work assignments after she filed her EEO complaint. Despite Complainant’s protests about the
conduct, in August 2013, Complainant alleged that other TSOs publicly mentioned her complaints
and voiced embarrassing and childish comments towards her. ROI at 710. For example, she
claimed that LTSO remarked, “do you need to go into the break room for nap time and snack.”
Furthermore, she alleged that on September 3, 2013, STSO mentioned to all of Complainant’s co-
workers that “‘someone’ was complaining to [management at the Raleigh International Airport]
that we are not taking things seriously.” ROI at 711. After a review of the record, we find
Complainant has proven she was subjected to retaliation for engaging in EEO activity.
                                                11                                     0120150799

Agency Liability for Conduct of Co-workers

Complainant’s allegations involve both co-workers and supervisors. Regarding her co-workers,
we note the Agency is responsible for acts of sexual harassment in the workplace only where the
Agency knew or should have known of the conduct, and it failed to take immediate and appropriate
corrective action. See 29 C.F.R. § 1604.11(d); see also EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious
Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors (June 18, 1999) at p. 5 (Commission’s long-
standing guidance on employer liability for harassment by co-workers remains in effect - an
employer is liable unless it knew or should have known of the misconduct, unless it can show that
it took immediate and appropriate corrective action).

The most troubling piece of this record is management’s utter disregard of its responsibilities to
appropriately address the co-worker harassment. The record reveals Complainant complained to
her first-level supervisor (STSO) in March, her second-level supervisor (TSM) in April and then
to her third-level supervisor (AFSD) in August 2013. At each stage, management’s responses were
inadequate. STSO spoke with TSO1 in a public place, which was not an effective or appropriate
remedial measure. TSM did not provide immediate action because he conducted an investigation
in July 2013, months after the initial incidents occurred. By this time, however, TSM said that he
found insufficient corroboration. There is no information in the record as to the reason for this
delayed investigation, and upon review, we find this inquiry did in fact reveal credible support for
Complainant’s claim that she was subjected to harassment. ROI at 392, 590.

While management may have spoken to the TSOs about their inappropriate conduct, their action
failed to end the harassment. Rather, retaliation from co-workers, and ultimately from
management, continued unaddressed.         The record reveals that management identified
Complainant’s behaviors as the source of the problem, rather than the conduct of her coworkers.
The failure of the local management to deal with the harassment was so evident that even AFSD
acknowledged in an email to TSM on August 16, 2013, that he was not responding to the situation
appropriately.

On appeal, 4 Complainant presented the following email from AFSD to TSM:

       I read over the file here at RDU regarding [Complainant’s] complaint. However, I did not
       see anything related to your final resolution. Also, I would hope that [TSO1] was issued
       at least a LOC for her inappropriate comments to [Complainant]. In her written statement,
       she admits to making the statements reference to gay marriage, not having a man and the
       dog. [TSO1’s] statements are totally inappropriate and should have been addressed in
       writing, not verbally as it appears.

       Question: did you respond to [Complainant] in writing?


4
 There is no explanation from either party as to why this email was not in the ROI, or how
Complainant obtained it to include with her appeal.
                                                 12                                     0120150799

See Complainant’s Appeal Brief at Exhibit 1. 5

It was not until August 22, 2013, soon after this email, that TSM finally sent Complainant the
results of her March 2013 allegations. After a review of the record, we find the Agency is liable
for the harassment because it failed to take immediate and appropriate remedial actions to end the
harassment.

The Agency is under an obligation to do “whatever is necessary” to end harassment, to make a
victim whole, and to prevent the misconduct from recurring. Complainant v. Dep’t of the Army,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120091345 (February 1, 2012); see also Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious
Employer Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors, supra (stating that “remedial
measures should be designed to stop the harassment, correct its effects on the employee, and ensure
that the harassment does not recur”). Taking only a stop-gap remedial action does not absolve the
Agency of liability where that action is ineffective. See Logsdon v. Dep’t of Agriculture, EEOC
Appeal No. 07A40120 (Feb. 28, 2006).

To the extent that the Agency could not separate the individuals due to the nature of the facility, it
should have disciplined or transferred TSO1. Furthermore, Complainant repeatedly requested a
transfer to escape the harassment, but this request was repeatedly denied because the CBA
allegedly prohibited such a transfer. While we are skeptical that this explanation would suffice
under the circumstances, we are unable to examine the CBA because it was not placed into the
record. We also note the absence of any sexual harassment policy from the record, which further
supports our finding that the Agency failed to establish that it took immediate and appropriate
corrective action after it learned of the harassment.

Supervisory Harassment

Complainant’s harassment complaint also includes allegations that she brought against STSO, as
well as TSM and AFSD, when she was issued a lower performance evaluation than she deserved, 6
and then terminated, allegedly because she was AWOL for 3.15 hours. An employer is subject to
vicarious liability for harassment when it is “created by a supervisor with immediate (or
successively higher) authority over the employee.” Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S.
742, 118 S.Ct. 2257, 2270 (1998); Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 118 S.Ct. 2275,
2292-93 (1998). When the harassment does not result in a tangible employment action being taken
against the employee, the employer may raise an affirmative defense to liability.

5
  We are not persuaded by the Agency’s confusing argument on appeal as to why we should
disregard this evidence. Rather, we are concerned that this email was absent from the ROI, given
its relevance to the question of whether the Agency took appropriate steps to correct the
harassment. Additionally, we note that the record contains enough evidence showing that the
Agency did not take sufficient steps to end the harassing conduct.
6
  The Agency changed Complainant’s evaluation to an “Exceeded Expectations” after she
complained.
                                                13                                     0120150799

The agency can meet this defense, which is subject to proof by a preponderance of the evidence,
by demonstrating: (a) that it exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any
harassing behavior; and (b) that appellant unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventive
or corrective opportunities provided by the agency or to avoid harm otherwise. Burlington
Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 118 S.Ct. at 2270; Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 118 S.Ct. at 2293;
Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors, supra.

However, the affirmative defense is not available when the harassment results in a tangible
employment action (e.g., a discharge, demotion, or undesirable reassignment) being taken against
the employee. See id., at IV(c). This sort of claim is analyzed like any other case in which a
challenged employment action is alleged to be discriminatory. If the employer produces evidence
of a nondiscriminatory explanation for the tangible employment action, a determination must be
made whether that explanation is a pretext designed to hide a discriminatory motive. Id. If it is
determined that the tangible action was based on a discriminatory reason linked to the preceding
harassment, relief could be sought for the entire pattern of misconduct culminating in the tangible
employment action, and no affirmative defense is available. If the tangible employment action
was based on a non-discriminatory motive, then the employer would have an opportunity to raise
the affirmative defense to a claim based on the preceding harassment. Id.

After a review of the entire record, Complainant established that the Agency’s reasons for its
performance rating and termination were a pretext to retaliate against her. Complainant alleged
that she performed higher than her rating revealed, and when she challenged the rating,
management changed it. With respect to the termination, the record does not contain documentary
evidence of Complainant’s comings and goings on the day in question, and there is conflicting
evidence in the record as to how long Complainant was absent from the facility. Our review of
the evidence reveals that TSM authorized Complainant’s absence from the facility for two hours
after the first incident occurred, since by that time TSO1’s shift would have ended. ROI at 595,
1030. The second incident seemed to last no more than 30 minutes and occurred soon after
Complainant’s return to work around 4:00 p.m. Accordingly, we find insufficient evidence in the
record which supports the Agency’s finding that Complainant was AWOL for 3 hours and 15
minutes. Fellow TSOs corroborated Complainant’s account that that other TSOs were absent from
their positions on occasion but not similarly disciplined. ROI at 551.

Rather, we find that Complainant established the Agency’s reason for issuing the termination was
a pretext to retaliate against her. Notably, the undisputed reason Complainant left the facility was
because the Agency failed to stop the harassment from TSO1. The record convinces us that
Complainant felt unsafe, had pursued all available avenues to avoid the harassment, and found no
other option but to leave and see her physician. Therefore, we find that Complainant’s first
excused absence, and subsequent shorter absence on October 23, 2013, were not legitimate reasons
to terminate her employment, considering evidence that others were not similarly treated, as well
as the Agency’s failure to cure the ongoing harassment, which created an intolerable working
environment. Accordingly, we find Complainant’s termination was a pretext to retaliate against
her for engaging in EEO activity.
                                               14                                     0120150799

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we REVERSE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the matter
for further action in accordance with the ORDER below.

                                            ORDER

Unless otherwise specified herein, within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date this
decision is issued, the Agency shall take the following actions:

   1) The Agency shall rescind the AWOL charge and Notice of Termination and retroactively
      restore Complainant to her position as Transportation Security Officer at the Greenville,
      North Carolina facility or to a substantially equivalent position at a mutually agreed upon
      location, including Santa Barbara, California. Preference in facilities shall be given to a
      location close to Complainant’s residence. Complainant shall not be required to work at
      the Greenville, North Carolina facility if TSO1 and the other responsible management
      officials are still at this location. Complainant has fifteen (15) days to accept or decline
      the Agency’s offer of reinstatement. If Complainant should decline the Agency’s offer of
      reinstatement, the date of her declination shall be the end date for any back pay due
      Complainant.

   2) The Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with interest, and other
      benefits due Complainant since November 6, 2013, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501, no
      later than sixty (60) calendar days after the date this decision is issued. Complainant shall
      cooperate in the Agency’s efforts to compute the amount of back pay and benefits due, and
      she shall provide all relevant information requested by the Agency. If there is a dispute
      regarding the exact amount of back pay and/or benefits, the Agency shall issue a check to
      Complainant for the undisputed amount within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the
      Agency determines the amount it believes to be due. Complainant may petition for
      enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or
      enforcement must be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the
      statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The Agency shall pay
      Complainant for her proven increased tax liability.

   3) The Agency shall provide training to TSO1 and the LSTOs at the facility as well as
      responsible management officials, including STSO, TSM, and AFSD, regarding their
      responsibilities under EEO laws, with a special emphasis on retaliation and sex
      discrimination.

   4) The Agency shall give Complainant a notice of her right to submit objective evidence and
      request objective evidence from Complainant in support of her request for compensatory
      damages. The Agency shall provide Complainant with sufficient explanation and
      specificity to allow her to reasonably respond to the Agency’s request. Upon receipt of
                                                 15                                      0120150799

       Complainant’s submission, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental investigation to
       determine the amount of compensatory damages due to Complainant, if any, and issue a
       decision on compensatory damages. The supplemental investigation and Agency decision
       shall be completed within sixty (60) days of the date the Agency receives Complainant’s
       submission of objective evidence. A copy of the Agency decision on damages and
       supplemental investigation must be transmitted to Complainant and her named
       representative. A copy of the Agency decision on damages must be submitted to the
       Compliance Officer, noted below.

   5) The Agency shall consider taking appropriate disciplinary action against TSO1 and the
      LTSOs, as well as all responsible management officials still employed by the Agency,
      including STSO, TSM, and AFSD. The Commission does not consider training to be
      disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the Compliance Officer. If the
      Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency
      decides not to take disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to
      impose discipline. If any of the responsible management officials have left the Agency’s
      employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of their departure date(s).

   6) The Agency shall pay Complainant’s reasonable attorney fees as directed below.

   7) The Agency shall post a notice of the finding of discrimination in accordance with the
      paragraph below.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency’s calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its facility at the Pitt-Greenville Airport in Greenville, North
Carolina copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency’s
duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for
60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted
to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled “Implementation of the
Commission's Decision,” within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The
report must be in digital format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                                 16                                     0120150799

                                  ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)),
she is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the complaint.
29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The attorney
shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                            STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                                  17                                    0120150799

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)
This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title.
                                                  18                                      0120150799

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means
the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 16, 2021
Date
