              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Deon L., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Antony J. Blinken,
                                           Secretary,
                                      Department of State,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021000848

                                   Agency No. DOS-0237-20

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency's final decision dated October 6, 2020, dismissing a formal
complaint of unlawful employment discrimination alleging violations of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. The
Commission accepts the appeal in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405.

                                        BACKGROUND

In 2015, Complainant, a Library of Congress employee, was appointed the Field Director of the
Kenya Overseas Office located in the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya.

Since 1962, the Library of Congress (hereinafter “Library” or “LOC”) has maintained field offices
abroad, to acquire, catalog, preserve, and distribute library and research materials from countries
where such materials are unavailable through conventional acquisition methods. There are six
Library field offices located around the world, including Kenya. According to LOC, “for safety
and security, the Library’s field offices must be located within U.S. Embassy compounds.” The
Library funds the security, construction, and maintenance of these field offices embedded in the
embassies. As Field Director in Kenya, Complainant supervised twenty-four employees.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2021000848

In June 2020, Complainant contacted an Agency (the State Department, not the LOC) EEO
counselor regarding claims that the U.S. Ambassador to Kenya was subjecting him to a
discriminatory hostile work environment. Informal efforts to resolve Complainant’s concerns
were unsuccessful. When contacted by the EEO office, the Ambassador responded by stating that
it should cease processing Complainant’s complaint because the 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 EEO
complaint process was not available to LOC employees. Nevertheless, on September 10, 2020,
Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint against the Agency alleging discrimination based on
race (“multi-racial”) and disability (associated with autistic son), as well as reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity.

In correspondence dated October 5, 2020, the Agency directed the Library to remove Complainant
from the Nairobi Embassy. The Agency stated that if the Library failed to do so, it would notify
the Government of Kenya that Complainant was no longer a member of the U.S. Mission and
cancel his diplomatic passport. 2

The next day, the Agency issued a final decision dismissing Complainant’s EEO complaint for
failure to state a claim. Citing 29 C.F. 1614.103(d)(3), the Agency reasoned that Complainant is
an employee of the LOC, an agency not covered by the 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 federal sector EEO
complaint process.

Complainant filed the instant appeal. On appeal, Complainant’s attorney contends that the Agency
failed to consider whether Complainant is a joint employee of both LOC and the Agency. In
support of his belief that the Agency is his joint employer, Complainant contends that his Field
Director position is “dependant on the office, diplomatic status, privileges and immunities, as well
as Embassy housing.” Further, his work is performed on Agency premises. According to
Complainant, the Agency “has complete control over discharging a LOC employee”, as illustrated
by the Agency’s “ultimatum” to LOC seeking Complainant’s immediate removal.

The Library has filed an amicus curiae brief in support of Complainant’s appeal. While pointedly
not addressing the merits of Complainant’s complaint, LOC asserts that it “has an interest in
ensuring that its employees can avail themselves of EEO protections when an employee in the
Executive Branch violates or allegedly violates the civil protections of Library employees.” By
dismissing Complainant’s EEO complaint, LOC believes that the Agency “took an overly
restrictive view of its jurisdiction to process [the] complaint and failed to consider Complainant’s
joint employment status with the Department of State for EEO purposes.”



2
  In response, LOC agreed to “temporarily relocate” Complainant to his home in Uganda, where
he would work on “issues unrelated to the Library’s Nairobi Field Office, but expressed its
disagreement with the Agency’s conclusions regarding Complainant. Additionally, LOC noted
that in June 2020, it had seemingly resolved the Ambassador’s issues with Complainant, over the
last two years, by “putting distance” between the two. No new issues had been brought to LOC’s
attention since that time.
                                                 3                                     2021000848

While acknowledging that LOC itself is exempt from the EEOC’s jurisdiction, Library argues that
its employees are not foreclosed from challenging discriminatory actions by an agency covered by
the EEOC. The Library contends that, to conclude otherwise, would leave those LOC employees
that are under the control of Executive Branch agencies without any recourse for allegedly
discriminatory treatment.

The Library requests that the case be remanded to the Agency for a joint employee analysis.
Moreover, it believes that such consideration will result in the Agency being considered a joint
employer because the Agency had control over Complainant’s office, housing, passports, Kenyan
driver’s license, and its revocation of his diplomatic status was “tantamount to removing him from
his Library position.” As a result of the Agency’s actions, Complainant could not continue his
Field Director duties, including supervision of the staff. 3

In response, the Agency argues that it is undisputed that Complainant is an employee of LOC, and
therefore the proper forum for Complainant’s case is LOC and not the EEOC. Moreover, it asserts
that in Ma v. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 & 01962390 (May
29, 1998) and its progeny the Commission did not determine if such an analysis is “at all applicable
where, as here, the complainant is specifically excluded by statute from pursuing his claim at the
EEOC.” The Agency contend that absent a waiver of sovereign immunity, there is no need to
consider whether it is a joint employer.

The Agency argues, in the alternative, that even if the joint employer analysis is conducted the
result would show that the Agency simply “serves as a provider of residential and office space, as
well as certain services overseas to the LOC” in exchange for compensation by Library.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §1614.103(a) provides that complaints of employment discrimination
shall be processed in accordance with Part 1614 of the EEOC regulations. EEOC Regulation 29
C.F.R. § 1614.103(c) provides that within the covered departments, agencies and units, Part 1614
applies to all employees and applicants for employment. The Agency (the State Department) falls
under the Commission’s jurisdiction. In contrast, the Part 1614 federal sector EEO process does
not apply to employees of LOC. 4 See 29 C.F.R. 1614.103(d)(3). This point is not disputed by
Complainant or the LOC itself.

Rather, the focus here is whether or not, for purposes of the EEO complaint process, the State
Department may be considered a joint employer of Complainant.



3
 According to LOC, it had to appoint an interim director to the Kenyan Field office to maintain
continuity of operations.
4
 As noted in LOC’s brief, it is subject to Title VII, but “the remedial scheme for Library employees
who challenge Library actions is different than most other federal agencies.”
                                                 4                                      2021000848

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each exercise sufficient control of
an individual to qualify as the worker’s employer. Compliance Manual, Section 2-
III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). If such joint employer status is found, then Complainant is entitled to use the
EEO process to address his claims of discriminatory Agency actions, as would any other Agency
employee. Consequently, we find little merit in the Agency’s assertion that a joint employment
analysis is not applicable. The analysis would be used to assess Complainant’s relationship with
the Agency (State Department), a department subject to the Part 1614 federal sector EEO process.
It is not to consider his relationship with LOC - an entity expressly excluded from Commission
jurisdiction – which is undisputedly one of employer/employee. Likewise, in the more common
situation, where a private staffing firm contracts with an agency subject to the federal sector EEO
process, such staffing firm employees must abide by the private sector process for addressing
claims of discrimination. Under some circumstances, however, those individuals may also be
considered to be employees of the contracting federal agency, in which case the 29 C.F.R. 1614
process applies. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Application of EEO Laws to Contingent
Workers Placed by Temporary Employment Agencies and Other Staffing Firms (Dec. 3, 1997).

To determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise sufficient control, EEOC considers
factors derived from common law principles of agency. See id. “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2.
No one factor is considered to be decisive and we emphasize that it is not necessary to satisfy a
majority of the factors. Rather, the analysis is holistic. All the circumstances in the individual’s
relationship with the agency should be considered to determine if the agency should be deemed
the worker’s joint employer. See Serita B. v. Department of the Army, EEOC Appeal No.
0120150846 (November 10, 2016); Ma v. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Appeal Nos.
01962389 & 01962390 (May 29, 1998). See also, EEOC Compliance Manual Section 2,
“Threshold Issues,” Section 2-III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) (May 12, 2000); EEOC Enforcement Guidance:
Application of EEO Laws to Contingent Workers Placed by Temporary Employment Agencies
and Other Staffing Firms (Dec. 3, 1997).

In this case, the record contains limited information regarding any of the factors to be considered
in determining the joint employment issue. For example, in the Agency’s October 5, 2020 letter
it stated: “we have concluded that [Complainant] is unable to carry out the LOC’s mission in
Nairobi due to his disruptive behavior and that his continued presence at post is untenable. We
are prepared to act independently if necessary.” There are references to Complainant’s
participation, or lack thereof, in “Country Team” meetings. The LOC’s October 16, 2020
correspondence references previously raised issues between Complainant and the Ambassador.
However, we are unable to glean the level of control the Agency had over Complainant. There is
no information regarding Complainant’s day-to-day responsibilities and interactions with, or
management by, Agency officials including, but not limited to, the Ambassador. Therefore, the
case is remanded to the Agency for a supplemental investigation to gather the information
necessary to conduct a proper analysis of its joint employer status.

As for the Agency’s contentions regarding the services it provides to Library, or the absence of
services received by Complainant, these are more appropriately considered in the context of the
joint employment analysis.
                                                5                                     2021000848

We agree with Complainant and the LOC that the Agency improperly dismissed the formal
complaint without considering Complainant’s joint employment status for EEO purposes.

                                         CONCLUSION

The Agency’s final decision dismissing the instant formal complaint is VACATED and the matter
is REMANDED for further processing in accordance with this decision and the ORDER below.

                                             ORDER

The Agency is ORDERED to conduct a supplemental investigation on whether it has sufficient
control over Complainant to be considered his joint employer for the purpose of utilizing the 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 EEO complaint process. Thereafter, the Agency shall give Complainant a copy
of the supplemental investigation, provide him an opportunity to respond, and include his response
in the supplemental investigation.

Based on the results of the supplemental investigation, the Agency shall issue a new decision
accepting the complaint for further processing or procedurally dismissing it with appeal rights to
the EEOC. The Agency shall complete the above actions within 60 calendar days after this decision
is issued.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the statement
entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall include supporting
verifying the corrective action has been implemented, including a copy of the acceptance letter or
final decision, as applicable.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408.
                                                 6                                      2021000848

A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the
deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a
civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                 RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
                                                   7                                      2021000848

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 9, 2021
Date
