              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Michal J., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                        Andrew M. Saul,
                                         Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019004015

                                 Hearing No. 520-2017-00600X

                                 Agency No. NY-16-0873-SSA

                                           DECISION

                                        JURISDICTION

On June 8, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
May 10, 2019, final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission REVERSES the
Agency’s final order.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) erred when dismissing
Complainant’s hearing request as a sanction for repeated noncompliance with discovery orders.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                        2019004015

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Claims Specialist
Trainee, GS-7, at the Agency’s Laconia Field Office in Bronx, New York. Complainant contacted
an EEO Counselor on August 23, 2016, and filed a formal EEO complaint on November 28, 2016,
alleging that the Agency discriminated against him (and subjected him to non-sexual harassment)
on the bases of national origin (Puerto Rican and Dominican) and sex (male) beginning February
29, 2015, with regard to training, performance evaluations, time and attendance; and when
Complainant was terminated from his position of Claims Specialist on September 1, 2016.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing.

On November 15, 2018, the parties appeared before the AJ in person for a Pre-Hearing Conference
in accordance with the Case Acknowledgment and Notice of Pre-Hearing Conference (Notice)
issued on September 25, 2018; and the Amended Case Acknowledgment and Notice of Pre-
Hearing Conference issued on November 5, 2018. The Notice outlined how the parties were to
prepare for the conference, the purpose of which was to review the investigative record to date and
to prepare the parties for any further development and disposition of the EEO complaint. The
Notice included a warning that failure to follow the Order or any other orders of the AJ may result
in sanctions, up to and including dismissal of the complaint.

On February 6, 2019, the AJ issued a Post-Conference Order which set forth the claims to be
adjudicated, a discovery schedule, and a summary judgment motion schedule. 2 The parties were
ordered to serve their discovery demands, including damages, within ten calendar days of the Post-
Conference Order (February 16, 2019). The parties were also ordered to file their response(s) to
the discovery demands within ten calendar days of receipt of the demand(s) (February 26, 2019,
at the latest). The parties were to participate in a discovery status conference with the AJ by
telephone on March 6, 2019.

On February 13, 2019, Agency Counsel contacted the AJ by email with a copy (cc) to
Complainant, asking for clarification as to whether discovery would include discovery on
damages. The AJ responded that discovery would include damages. On February 15, 2019,
Complainant emailed Agency Counsel, with cc to the AJ, stating that he had received the Agency's
discovery demands and that he would only have nine days in which to respond. Complainant
requested an additional 30 to 45 days to respond. Agency Counsel responded, with a cc to the AJ,
that he did not have the flexibility with the deadlines in the case to agree to Complainant’s request
for an additional 30 to 45 days in which to respond. Agency Counsel referred Complainant to the
AJ’s February 6, 2019, Order, stating that he was agreeable to receiving the responses within 10
days of February 15, 2019.


2
 The AJ indicated that the issuance of the Post-Conference Order was delayed by the partial
government shutdown, stating that the Commission was closed during that time.
                                              3                                      2019004015

On February 18, 2019, after the deadline to serve discovery demands had passed, Complainant
emailed to the AJ, with a cc to Agency Counsel, a list of document demands from the Agency.
Agency Counsel objected to Complainant's discovery demands as being untimely and beyond the
scope relevant to the case. The AJ asked the parties to provide her with a date and time when they
were both available, so the AJ could schedule a conference call to discuss the apparent discovery
disputes. The AJ reminded the parties that their discovery requests were to be relevant to the
claims and that the AJ would not permit discovery requests that were overly broad or not directly
relevant to Complainant's claims. Complainant emailed back that he was available "mostly after
5pm on most days and all day on Sundays with prior notice" and provided four days on which he
was available, only one of which was during regular work hours. Agency Counsel indicated that
he was available on various days between 4:15-5:00 p.m. and at 5:30 p.m. on one other date.

In preparation for the call, which was scheduled for February 28, 2019, Agency Counsel emailed
the AJ, with a cc to Complainant, the discovery requests that were originally served on
Complainant on February 14, 2019. After the call, the AJ issued a Case Management Order, which
gave Complainant until March 7, 2019, to respond to the Agency's discovery demands. The AJ
also ordered Complainant to provide the Agency with the communications between Complainant
and the EEO Investigator in which Complainant asserted that he provided the EEO Investigator
with documents/information that were not already included in the ROI as well as any such
documents and information actually provided to the EEO Counselor as part of the
communications. The AJ also ruled that Complainant's discovery demands were generally
overbroad and required the Agency to only respond to specified demands. The parties were again
notified that failure to comply with this Order may result in sanctions up to dismissal of the
complaint or default judgment.

On February 28, 2019, Complainant emailed the AJ with a cc to Agency Counsel, requesting
additional document demands from the Agency. Complainant indicated that he had proof that he
sent the EEO Investigator his rebuttals along with the names of the correct individuals. The AJ
noted that the attached “proof” was just fax cover sheets. The AJ denied Complainant's request
and notified the parties that she would not accept any further motions or quasi-motions.

The Agency complied with the AJ’s order, providing an encrypted zip file of the discovery ordered
to Complainant on March 6, 2019. The AJ noted that Agency Counsel attempted to assist
Complainant in opening the zip file and offered to mail the files as well as make them available
for pick up. Agency Counsel also re-sent the documents to Complainant in portable document
format (pdf). Complainant indicated that he was going to send Agency Counsel "a series of
documents," apologizing in advance for the volume.

On March 8, 2019, Complainant emailed the AJ, with a cc to Agency Counsel, stating that he had
"fulfilled the discovery production request by emailing Agency Counsel 55 discovery production
emails containing all requested documentation for Complainant’s EEO case." Complainant stated
that he was unable to open the Agency's zip file and had yet to receive the Agency's discovery
demands as per the AJ’s order. Complainant sent another email accusing Agency Counsel of
"embellishing information and inadequacies."
                                               4                                        2019004015

The AJ found Complainant’s claim "patently outrageous." From the outset, the AJ noted, Agency
Counsel had conducted himself with professionalism and respect both to Complainant and the AJ,
particularly in the face of Complainant's willful refusal to follow the AJ’s Orders with respect to
the discovery process.

The AJ stated that the 55 documents that Complainant emailed to Agency Counsel were not fully
responsive to the interrogatories and document requests included in the Agency's well-crafted and
clear discovery request. The AJ asserted that Complainant had been warned numerous times that
his failure to follow the AJ’s orders may result in the dismissal of his request for a hearing.
Therefore, on March 8, 2019, the AJ dismissed Complainant’s request for a hearing.

The AJ remanded the complaint to the Agency and ordered the Agency to issue a Final Agency
Decision on the complaint within 60 days of the date of the AJ’s Order. The Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to
prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

In his Appeal Letter, Complainant reiterates his allegations, asserting that he had met his burden
of proving that his termination was the result of discriminatory animus. Complainant states that,
in dismissing his complaint, the AJ demonstrated significant bias while overseeing the preparation
for a potential hearing, asserting that out of frustration, the AJ expressed that she was overwhelmed
with work due to the government shut down.

Complainant states that the Agency’s May 10, 2019, FAD was untimely because it was three days
later than the May 7, 2019, date on which it was due to him.

Complainant requests that his case be reassigned to an impartial and fair AJ who would see the
context of his case and would render a decision within the parameters of the law. Complainant
requests that the Commission ask the Agency to assign a new attorney to his case who would work
with him to find a common ground, asserting that all he wants is to seek justice for the harms and
damages caused to him since 2016.

In its Appeal Brief, the Agency reiterates its explanations, stating that Complainant could not
establish that the Agency subjected him to non-sexual harassment with regard to training,
performance evaluations, and time and attendance; and that Complainant could not establish that
he was subjected to disparate treatment when he was terminated for performance deficiencies. The
Agency asks that its FAD be affirmed, and Complainant’s appeal dismissed.

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
                                               5                                       2019004015

§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission’s regulations afford broad authority for the conduct of hearings by
Administrative Judges. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109 et seq; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), (as revised Aug. 5, 2015);
Rountree v. Dep’t of Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 07A00015 (Jul. 13, 2001). The regulations state
that an AJ shall, in appropriate circumstances, take such actions as the AJ deems appropriate when
a party “…fail[s] without good cause shown to respond fully and in timely fashion to an order of
an administrative judge, or requests for the investigative file, for documents, records, comparative
data, statistics, affidavits, or the attendance of witnesses(es).” 29 C.F.R. §1614.109(f)(3)(i).

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §1614.109(f)(3) specifically sets forth the types of actions an AJ may
take when required by the appropriate circumstances. An AJ may: 1) draw an inference that the
requested information would have reflected unfavorably to the non-complying party; 2) consider
the requested information to be established in favor of the opposing party; 3) exclude other
evidence offered by the non-complying party; 4) issue a decision fully or partially in favor of the
opposing party; or 5) take other action deemed appropriate. Id.

In the present case, however, we find that the AJ erred in not providing Complainant with an
opportunity to respond prior to the dismissal of the hearing request. The Commission has
previously held that, prior to the imposition of sanctions, the party against whom such sanctions
are to be imposed is entitled to an opportunity to respond and show cause why sanctions should
not be imposed. Miller v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01A01735 (Jun. 18, 2004). We
do not condone Complainant’s failure to respond to the Agency’s discovery request despite
repeated warnings by the AJ. However, the AJ should have followed proper procedures and issued
a show cause order prior to ordering any sanctions according to the procedures in EEO MD-110
at Chapter 7.

We need not address whether an appropriately tailored sanction was imposed because we have
concluded that, in the absence of an order, the AJ erred in prematurely imposing a sanction
authorized by 29 C.F.R. §1614.109(f)(3).

                                         CONCLUSION

Therefore, after a careful review of the record, including Complainant's arguments on appeal, the
Agency's response, and arguments and evidence not specifically discussed in this decision, the
Commission reverses the Agency's final action and remands the matter to the Agency in
accordance with this decision and the Order below.
                                              6                                       2019004015

                                             ORDER

The Agency is directed to submit a copy of the complaint file to the EEOC New York District
Office Hearings Unit within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is issued. The
Agency shall provide written notification to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth below
that the complaint file has been transmitted to the Hearings Unit. Thereafter, the Administrative
Judge shall process the complaint in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109 and the Agency shall
issue a final action in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or the
agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                               7                                        2019004015

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the
applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of
the request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.
                                                 8                                        2019004015

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                       Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 17, 2021
Date
