              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                          Claudia B., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020000479

                                  Agency No. 4E-980-0102-18

                                           DECISION

On September 17, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 20, 2019 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS this matter for further
investigation.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier at the
Agency’s Riverton Heights Station in Seattle, Washington.

On December 29, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint wherein she claimed that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of her race (African-American), sex (female), disability
(plantar fasciitis) and age (61) when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020000479

           1. On dates to be specified, management worked her outside of her medical
              restrictions;

           2. On September 5, 2018, Complainant was called into the office when she could not
              deliver express mail because her feet were hurting;

           3. On September 28, 2018, Complainant was returned to her craft position after
              refusing to switch her non-scheduled days; and

           4. On unspecified dates, management failed to pay Complainant overtime. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before EEOC Administrative Judge
(AJ). 3 When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

Complainant stated that she has chronic plantar fasciitis that was first diagnosed in 1992 or 1993
and is considered permanent. Complainant stated that the Agency first became aware of her
condition in March 2002 as she provided medical documentation to station managers from 2002
through 2007 when they stopped asking for it, and then again in October 2018. The Agency stated
that Complainant described the duties she is unable to perform to include the inability to park and
loop, lift over 20 pounds and limited standing and walking. According to Complainant, she is
required to case and carry her route, and she performs these duties to a degree by making
adjustments.

With regard to claim (1), Complainant asserted that she worked outside her medical restrictions
from April 2018 through August 1, 2018 at the Burien Station and the Columbia Carrier Annex.
Complainant stated that she was a 204-B Acting Supervisor when this began. According to
Complainant, in addition to her acting supervisory duties, she had to assist clerks at the window,
dispatch mail two to three times daily and perform customer pick-ups and sales. Complainant
stated that the Terminal Station Official ordered her to work beyond her restrictions of standing
two hours per day and walking one and one-half hours.



2
  The Agency dismissed a claim regarding promotional opportunities pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.107(a)(2) on the grounds that Complainant failed to initiate contact with an EEO Counselor
in a timely manner. The Agency stated that the promotional opportunities for which Complainant
applied were between four and nine months prior to her initial EEO Counselor contact on
September 11, 2018. Thus, the Agency determined that Complainant’s EEO Counselor contact
was after the 45-day limitation period. Complainant raised no challenges to the dismissal of this
claim and the Commission can find no basis to disturb the dismissal.
3
  The following Agency officials identified by Complainant were not interviewed during the
investigation: the Burien Station Manager, the 204-B Acting Supervisor at the Riverton Station,
and the Customer Services Supervisor at the Skyway Station.
                                                3                                     2020000479

Complainant alleged that in June and July 2018, the Manager of the Columbia Station required her
to perform customer pick-ups, dispatch, equipment set-up, scan incorrectly sent parcels and
returns, and put away notice left parcels for five to six or more hours a day. Complainant stated
that these duties required her to walk back and forth in a warehouse-like building on cement floors
doing clerk work from the time she reported until closing.

Complainant claimed that in September 2018, the Manager of the Wallingford Station (her second-
line Supervisor) required her to work window service, customer pick-ups and whatever needed to
be done up front, which required standing and walking back and forth on hard surfaces, outside of
her medical restrictions. Complainant stated that from November 2018 to January 2019, a 204-B
Acting Supervisor required her to perform work that entailed excessive walking and standing more
than four hours a day at the Riverton Station, when she was restricted to standing two hours a day.
According to Complainant, on November 23, 2018, her Supervisor at the Riverton Station required
her to stand and case a full route and work nine and one-half hours casing and pulling down, even
though her standing limitations were two hours.

A National Limited Duty and Rehabilitation Reassessment Initiative questionnaire completed on
August 12, 2003, by Complainant’s physician indicated that she has plantar fasciitis, which is a
permanent condition resulting in the following restrictions: walking and standing for three and a
half hours; sitting for six hours; and lifting up to 50 pounds. CA-17 Duty Status Reports dated
November 12, 2017, and October 13, 2018, included the following limitations: lifting 20 pounds
continuously and 50 pounds intermittently; sitting for four hours continuously per day; standing
for two hours continuously per day; and walking for one and one-half hours continuously per day.

Complainant’s second-level Supervisor asserted that Complainant had expressed issues with her
feet, but he has never received medical documentation with respect to her medical condition. The
second-level Supervisor stated that he is unaware of any work limitations Complainant has or the
degree to which her condition affects her ability to perform her work. The Manager at the
Columbia Station stated that Complainant mentioned to him she had a medical condition.
However, he maintained that he has no other information about her medical condition or any idea
about her diagnosis.

Complainant’s Supervisor at the Riverton Station stated that he was aware of Complainant’s
medical condition. The Supervisor stated that Complainant provided him with a CA-17 Form that
he recalled as identifying her condition as being encephalitis. The Supervisor asserted that
Complainant’s medical condition affected her work performance. According to the Supervisor,
Complainant’s job duties consist of casing and carrying her route about 8-10 hours a day.

The Manager, Customer Service stated that he was unaware of Complainant’s medical condition
when she was detailed as an Acting Supervisor. The Manager asserted that Complainant informed
him of her medical condition when she was placed back in her regular position of City Carrier in
Fall 2018. According to the Manager, he did not receive medical documentation as Complainant
told him that she did not have any medical documentation.
                                                4                                     2020000479

The official at the Terminal Station stated in her affidavit that she did not receive medical
documentation concerning Complainant’s medical condition and she stated that Complainant did
not have work limitations.

Regarding claim (2), Complainant asserted that she was discriminated against on the basis of her
disability when she was called to the office on September 5, 2018 for refusing to deliver express
mail, which was due to her medical restrictions. Complainant claimed that she told the Acting
Manager that her feet were bothering her; however, the Acting Manager did not care about her and
wanted her to handle the express mail.

As to claim (3), Complainant stated that on September 24, 2018, her second-line Supervisor
instructed her to switch her off days and she responded she had already worked her off days for
the week due to working Amazon Sunday. Complainant claimed that on September 29, 2018, the
Manager, Customer Service, informed her that she was returning to her craft Carrier position
because she had been involved in another incident related to her refusal to switch her off days.

With regard to claim (4), Complainant claimed that she worked 12-13 hours on Saturdays in May
and June 2018, but she was only paid for 10 hours. Complainant stated that the Manager, Customer
Service, the Manager of the Columbia Station and the Manager of the Burien Station did not pay
her overtime. Complainant argued that management believed the work should be completed in
eight hours and instructed her to falsify the documentation she submitted at night to reflect that.
Complainant claimed that all of her alleged bases except for her disability were factors in being
denied overtime.

Complainant’s second-line Supervisor asserted that Complainant worked overtime at the
Columbia Station from May through August 2018 and he provided documentation that showed
she was paid overtime and penalty overtime. The second-line Supervisor stated that two
comparators identified by Complainant did not work overtime during the period of May through
August 2018. The second-line Supervisor explained that no data was available for the other
comparator named by Complainant because she had transferred to California.

In the decision, the Agency assumed arguendo Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination and found that management had articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons
for its actions. Complainant’s Supervisor, second-line Supervisor and the Manager of the
Columbia Station denied being aware that Complainant was working beyond her medical
restrictions. The Supervisor explained that although the CA-17 Form stated that Complainant can
carry up to 50 pounds, she said she could not lift 20-30 pounds. According to the Supervisor,
Complainant does not stand for two hours or walk as long as one and one-half hours. The
Supervisor stated that Complainant claimed her condition was aggravated and worsened by her
work, but he asserted that Complainant worked within her documented limitations.

As for claims (2) and (3), the Manager, Customer Service, asserted that he called Complainant to
his office because the Skyway Station Acting Manager complained to him that Complainant was
refusing to assist in operations.
                                                5                                     2020000479

The Manager noted that he brought to Complainant’s attention that the Acting Manager asked her
to deal with the express mail, but she refused, and a Window Clerk asked for assistance on the
window and she refused to provide assistance on that as well even though the Acting Manager
asked her to help. The Manager maintained that he told Complainant that she needed to cooperate
and work as a team but her response to him was negative. When the next day the Acting Manager
reported that Complainant was refusing to switch her non-scheduled days, the Manager returned
Complainant to her City Carrier position due to her refusal to cooperate with management.

In terms of claim (4), the Manager of the Columbia Station stated that he had no knowledge that
management ever failed to pay Complainant for any overtime that she worked. The Manager of
the Columbia Station asserted that Complainant used a time card and when she did not have it, he
placed her time in the TACs system to ensure she was always properly paid. Complainant’s
second-line Supervisor stated that Complainant received overtime and the Agency stated that he
provided TACs reports that he contended showed that Complainant was paid for overtime hours
worked. The Manager, Customer Service, stated that based on his knowledge, Complainant was
paid overtime for all time worked

The Agency determined that Complainant failed to show that management’s reasons for its actions
were pretextual. As a result, the Agency found that Complainant was not subjected to
discrimination as alleged. Thereafter, Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires, inter alia, that the agency develop an impartial
and appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised in the complaint.
One purpose of an investigation is to gather facts upon which a reasonable fact finder may draw
conclusions as to whether a violation of the discrimination statutes has occurred. Id.; EEO MD-
110, at Chap. 6, § IV.B. An investigation must include “a thorough review of the circumstances
under which the alleged discrimination occurred; the treatment of members of the Complainant's
group as compared with the treatment of similarly situated employees...and any policies and/or
practices that may constitute or appear to constitute discrimination, even though they have not
been expressly cited by the complainant.” Id. at § IV.C. In addition, an investigator must identify
and obtain “all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome.”
Id. at § VI.D.

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination against qualified disabled individuals. See
29 C.F.R. § 1630. To establish that Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation,
Complainant must show that: (1) she is an individual with a disability, as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1630.2(g); (2) she is a qualified individual with a disability pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m);
and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See Enforcement Guidance:
Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
EEOC No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002).
                                                  6                                     2020000479

Under the Commission's regulations, an Agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
Agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)
and (p).

Upon review, the Commission finds that the investigation was inadequate and that the record lacks
the thoroughness required for the fact finder to address the ultimate issue of whether discrimination
occurred. Specifically, the Investigator did not obtain affidavits from witnesses whose testimony
is relevant to a disposition of this matter. We observe that the Investigator did not obtain an
affidavit from the Manager at the Burien Station who Complainant claims had her perform work
beyond her medical restrictions, and also did not pay her overtime. The Investigator also did not
secure an affidavit from the 204-B Acting Supervisor at the Riverton Station who Complainant
claims had her perform excessive walking and standing in excess of four hours per day from
November 2018 to January 2019 at the Riverton Station. Additionally, the record requires an
affidavit from the Acting Manager at the Skyway Station who Complainant claims registered the
complaints about her that led the Manager, Customer Service, to call her into his office. In light
of the inadequacy of the investigation, it is necessary that these individuals provide affidavits that
are responsive to the claims in this complaint.

Based on the foregoing, we find that the record was not adequately developed. An appropriate
factual record is one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw conclusions as to whether a
violation of the discrimination statutes occurred. Therefore, the Commission will remand this
matter for a supplemental investigation.

                                          CONCLUSION

The Agency’s final decision is VACATED, and this complaint is REMANDED for a supplemental
investigation pursuant to the Order below.


                         ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD (B0617)

Within ninety (90) calendar days of date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct and
complete a supplemental investigation consistent with the requirements of 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108(b), in EEO MD-110, Chapter 6 and consistent with this decision. The supplemental
investigation shall include, but is not limited to:

       a)      The Agency shall secure an affidavit from the individual identified in its final
               decision as the management official at the Burien Station who Complainant claims
               worked her outside her medical restrictions and did not pay her overtime.

       b)      The Agency shall obtain an affidavit from the individual identified in its final
               decision as the 204-B Acting Supervisor who Complainant claims worked her
               outside her medical restrictions from November 2018 to January 2019 at the
               Riverton Station.
                                                7                                     2020000479

       c)      The Agency shall secure an affidavit from the individual identified in its final
               decision as the supervisory official at the Skyway Station who reported to the
               Manager, Customer Service, Complainant’s alleged refusal to assist in operations.

Upon completion of the supplemental investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant a
copy of the supplemental investigation file and shall notify Complainant in writing of her right to
request a hearing before a Commission Administrative Judge or the issuance of an Agency
decision, unless the matter is otherwise resolved. If Complainant requests an Agency decision
without a hearing, the Agency shall issue its decision within sixty (60) days of receipt of
Complainant’s request.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FEDSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include evidence that the directed action has been taken.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.
                                                 8                                      2020000479

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                 RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or the
agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives
it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   9                                      2020000479

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 8, 2020
Date
