             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Tyson A., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                             v.

                                    Thomas J. Vilsack,
                                         Secretary,
                                 Department of Agriculture
                            (Food Safety and Inspection Service),
                                          Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2020000972

                               Agency No. FSIS-2019-00177

                                        DECISION

On October 31, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 1, 2019, final decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
claiming employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. The Commission accepts the
appeal in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405.

                                      BACKGROUND

The Agency strives to protect public health by assuring meat, poultry, and egg products are
wholesome through inspection of establishments 2 and products. Since 2012, Complainant
worked as Food Inspector, Slaughterhouse, in furtherance of this mission. During the relevant
time, he was assigned to the West Liberty Foods Meat Processing Plant in West Liberty, Iowa.

In mid-2018, Complainant began experiencing breathing difficulties. Complainant observed that
his symptoms were greater immediately after working and eased when he was away from work.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  According to the Agency, it does not own nor control the establishments where Agency
personnel perform their job duties.
                                                 2                                     2020000972

Complainant was diagnosed with airway disease related to occupational irritant exposure.
Immediately following this diagnosis, on August 23, 2018, Complainant submitted a doctor’s
note to the Agency and filed a worker’s compensation claim. According to Complainant, the
Agency responded by telling him that it had no work for him, failed to engage in the interactive
process, and escorted him out of the plant. On November 27, 2018 and February 7, 2019,
Complainant requested reasonable accommodations which would enable him to return to work.
The Agency denied the requests.

Believing that the Agency’s actions were discriminatory, Complainant filed a formal EEO
complaint based on disability (breathing issues and Airway Inflammatory Disorder) and reprisal
(requested a reasonable accommodation) on February 28, 2019.

The Agency framed the claims as follows:

       1.      beginning on August 23, 2018, and continuing to present, management has
               not authorized Complainant’s return to work; and

       2.      on November 27, 2018, and February 7, 2019, management denied his
               requests for a reasonable accommodation, to include his use of a physician
               recommended and approved respirator while in the workplace, or a job
               reassignment in an area without airway irritants.

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant failed to timely
request a hearing or an Agency decision, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In its October 1, 2019 decision, the Agency found that Complainant was not discriminated as
alleged. As an initial matter, the Agency reasoned that Complainant’s August 23, 2018 doctor’s
note was not a request for a reasonable accommodation, but rather a statement informing
management that Complainant could not work on the slaughter floor where certain chemicals
were used. The sprays used to wash animal carcasses contained chemicals that caused
Complainant respiratory distress. Consequently, Complainant was removed from the facility.
Thereafter, in November 2018, Complainant requested the use of a respirator approved by his
doctor (hereinafter “Respirator-1”). The Agency rejected Respirator-1, without describing the
reason for the rejection, in its decision, but simply noted that “detailed reasons” were shared with
Complainant in its February 2019 denial. When the Agency provided Complainant with a
respirator (hereinafter “Respirator-2”), in early November 2018, Complainant allegedly refused
to use it, without explanation. Complainant submitted a second request for an accommodation,
on February 7, 2019, seeking a reassignment. After searching for a position within
Complainant’s parameters, the Agency notified him on April 2, 2019 that its efforts were
unsuccessful. In the Agency’s view, it had fulfilled its obligations to Complainant under the
Rehabilitation Act.
                                                   3                                      2020000972

As for his claim of reprisal, the Agency concluded that Complainant was not retaliated against
when his reasonable accommodation request was denied and he was not permitted to return to
work. Complainant was not prevented from returning, but rather he “refused to use the safety
devices he needed to work in the Plant.” As noted above, the Agency’s failure to provide
Complainant with a reassignment, was not discriminatory, but due to the fact that an appropriate
position could not be located.

Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                                   ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Reasonable Accommodation

Under the Commission's regulations, an agency is required to reasonably accommodate the
known limitations of a qualified individual with a disability, unless the agency can show that the
accommodation would cause an undue hardship. See 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(p); EEOC Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, EEOC No. 915.002 (October 17, 2002). Moreover, once an employer becomes
aware of the need for an accommodation, the employer has an obligation to engage in
an interactive process with the employee to identify and implement appropriate reasonable
accommodations. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3).

To establish that Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show
that: (1) he is an individual with a disability; (2) he is a qualified individual with a disability; and
(3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (Enforcement Guidance). “The term
‘qualified,’ with respect to an individual with a disability, means that the individual satisfies the
requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment
position such individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can
perform the essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).
                                                 4                                      2020000972

We find that Complainant is an individual with a disability. An individual with a disability is one
who: (1) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life
activities; (2) has a record of such impairment; or (3) is regarded as having such an impairment.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g). Major life activities include such functions as caring for one's self,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). An impairment is a disability if it substantially limits the ability of an
individual to perform a major life activity as compared to the ability of most people in the
general population. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(ii). The instant record reflects that Complainant, due
to workplace exposure to respiratory irritants, has developed asthma with acute exacerbation.
The condition substantially limits his ability to breathe.

After a complainant has shown that he is an individual with a disability, the complainant must
then establish that he is a “qualified individual with a disability,” an individual who satisfies the
requisite skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the employment
position that the individual holds or desires and who, with or without reasonable
accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).
Here, the record reflects that Complainant has worked as a Food Inspector since 2012. Agency
management confirmed that Complainant is capable of performing the essential functions of his
position. Therefore, we find that Complainant is a qualified individual.

The term “reasonable accommodation” means, in pertinent part, modifications or adjustments to
the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held is
customarily performed that enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential
functions of the position in question. See 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(o)(1)(ii). Reasonable
accommodations may include but are not limited to the following: job restructuring; part-time or
modified work schedules; reassignment to a vacant position; acquisition or modifications of
equipment or devices; appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training
materials, or policies; the provision of qualified readers or interpreters; and other similar
accommodations for individuals with disabilities. Id.

Complainant asserts that he first requested a reasonable accommodation for his breathing
problems on August 23, 2018, when he submitted his workers’ compensation claim and a
doctor’s note to his manager. While the instant record does not include a copy of the August 23,
2018 note, Complainant attested that it stated that he could not be exposed to the chemicals used
to wash animal carcasses because the chemicals caused him respiratory distress. Similarly, the
Agency described the note as explaining Complainant could not work on the slaughter floor
where certain chemicals were used and sprayed. However, instead of treating the note as a
reasonable accommodation request, the Agency considered the note to be a prohibition on
working the slaughter floor and sent Complainant home. Based on the limited evidence before
us, we find the Agency’s failure to view the August 23, 2018 information as a request for an
accommodation to be rational.

In the immediate weeks that followed, Complainant remained at home and again communicated
a need for an accommodation.
                                                 5                                      2020000972

On September 25, 2018, the Agency confirmed receipt of Complainant’s request to use a
“mask/respirator while working to inhibit/limit exposure to peracetic acid and lactic acid washes
used on animal carcasses” as well as a medical release for Complainant’s pulmonologist
(hereinafter “Dr. H”). In an October 15, 2018 email, Complainant followed up with the Agency,
plainly stating “I am formally requesting, again, a work accommodation.” Attached to the email
was a note from Dr. H stating: “It is reasonable to try the respirator in the work setting, to see if
you would tolerate working in that setting without an exacerbation of your airway disease while
working….” Complainant’s doctor also advised that the respirator should be fit-tested to ensure
inhaled air only flowed through the filter. It was not until October 22, 2018, that the Agency
issued a response to Complainant’s repeated requests for a respirator. In the email from the
Human Resources Specialist/Reasonable Accommodation Advisor (hereinafter “RA-Advisor”),
Complainant was informed that his request for a respirator was denied because an Agency
review concluded “there is no evidence that demonstrates significant inhalation exposure to the
employees at the establishment.”

Complainant’s attorney then made efforts to obtain an accommodation for him, writing to RA-
Advisor on October 25, 2018, clarifying any early confusion over the August 23, 2018 note from
Dr. H by stating that Complainant was not prohibited from working on the slaughter floor, but
instead needed to mitigate his inhalation exposure. Additionally, the email noted that
Complainant was eager to return to work and could provide his own respirator, but asked what
other options the Agency was considering.

In a brief email, sent on November 2, 2018, Complainant’s manager (hereafter “Manager-Y”)
notified Complainant that the Agency would be able to provide Complainant with a respirator.
The record reflects that when Complainant returned to work on November 9, 2018, he was given
Respirator-2 which Complainant rejected as ineffective. While the Agency contends that
Complainant failed to provide any reason, the record shows otherwise. Quite simply, Respirator-
2 only filtered particulate matter, and it did not filter chemical gases and vapors. Respirator-2
would not provide Complainant with the necessary protection against irritant chemicals. Further,
the Agency made no effort to ensure the respirator fit properly. In contrast, a “Safety Half
Facepiece Disposable Respirator Assembly” was specifically labeled for use with organic vapor
and acid gas and endorsed by Complainant’s pulmonologist.

Correspondence from Complainant’s attorney reiterated the failings of Respirator-2 and sought
an explanation for the Agency’s rejection of Respirator-1. The efforts to obtain a solution that
would return Complainant to work were met with a brief November 16, 2018 email, from
Manager-Y, stating that he was “in the process of researching a few questions” and would be “in
touch”.

On November 27, 2018, Complainant received an email from Manager Y, as well as a “Denial of
Reasonable Accommodation Request” form. In the email, Manager reasoned that providing
Respirator-1 “would be an undue burden because it is a safety hazard while performing his
animal slaughter duties as well as concerns with complying with OSHA’s regulatory
requirements.”
                                                 6                                      2020000972

The denial form provided further details for the denial. For example, the Agency cited FOH’s
finding that Respirator-1 was “problematic” due to Complainant’s other heart and lung
conditions. Additionally, the use of Respirator-1 “has the potential to interfere with his ability to
look down and completely visualize his work area when using his knife.” According to the
denial, the size and shape of Respirator-1 “has the potential to interfere with Complainant’s head
movement and mobility” which is a “potential hazard to himself and co-workers” since the
workplace included machinery with moving parts, moving vehicles, and slippery surfaces.
Finally, the Agency stated that, based on pictures and the description of Respirator-1, it would
significantly interfere with Complainant’s ability to orally communicate.

As noted above, once the Agency became aware that Complainant was requesting a reasonable
accommodation it was required to engage in the interactive process. This
informal, interactive process should be a problem-solving approach that includes: an analysis of
the job to determine its essential functions; consultations with the complainant; an assessment of
the effectiveness of potential accommodations; and consideration of the complainant’s
preferences. 29 C.F.R. pt.1630, app. § 1630.9. The exact nature of this dialogue will vary
according to the particular circumstances. EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice
No. 915-002 (March 1, 1999), pg. 13. In the instant case, the Agency failed to participate in this
necessary exchange of information, which resulted in the improper denial of a reasonable
accommodation.

The Agency’s own internal Reasonable Accommodation Procedures, which it has submitted on
appeal, state that the interactive process is “extremely important” as is timeliness in processing
requests. Yet, the Agency’s actions in this case fail to abide by its own policies. More than one
month after Complainant’s first requests, the Agency simply denied the presence of harmful
irritants and the need for any protective equipment. Its determination illustrates the absence of
any individualized assessment, and           ignored the information repeatedly put forth by
Complainant, including medical documentation, regarding the ineffectiveness of Respirator-2
and the benefits of Respirator-1. Moreover, when the Agency finally issued a formal denial of
Respirator-1, its reasons were woefully inadequate.

With respect to FOH’s concerns that the use of Respirator-1 was “problematic” due to
Complainant’s other medical conditions, we find these reasons are unsubstantiated. Dr. H
repeatedly stated that it was “reasonable” and “worthwhile” for Complainant to try Respirator-1
in the work setting, believing that Complainant could tolerate the use without any adverse health
effects. Quite plainly, Dr. H’s notes reflect that he informed Agency officials that Complainant’s
“underlying cardiac and pulmonary conditions alone or in combination did not preclude use of a
respirator.” Using a possible accommodation for a limited trial period is often part of the
ongoing interactive process and can be a path towards identifying an effective accommodation.
Here, the Agency ignored such recommendations to test Complainant’s use of Respirator-1 on
the slaughter floor and instead put forward theoretical and speculative concerns.
                                                  7                                     2020000972

Fears that Respirator-1 would compromise Complainant’s field of vision or ability to orally
communicate with colleagues, putting himself and others in harm’s way, could have easily been
addressed by simply testing out the device. 3

The Agency’s November 27, 2018 denial also indicates that evaluating Respirator-1 during a
trial period would require compliance with OSHA standards and thus result in an “undue
burden” for the Agency. According to the Agency, in order to permit Complainant even trial use
of Respirator-1 it would have to “establish and implement a written respiratory protection
program, including the medical evaluation component, training, cleaning/storage/maintenance of
the respirator” since it presently did not have such a program. We find troubling the Agency’s
reasoning that the lack of a current written respiratory policy rises to the level of an undue
hardship, thereby excusing the Agency’s failure to provide a reasonable accommodation.

An “undue hardship” is a significant difficulty or expense in light of the agency's circumstances
and resources. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(p). The agency bears the burden of establishing, through
case-specific evidence, that a reasonable accommodation would cause an undue hardship. U.S.
Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. at 402. “Generalized conclusions will not suffice to support a
claim of undue hardship.” EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and
Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (October
17, 2002), “Undue Hardship Issues.” The Agency has not shown that use of Respirator-1 would
create an undue hardship.

In addition to not establishing that Respirator-1 was ineffective, the Agency failed to properly
consider possible alternative reasonable accommodations.


3
  To the extent that the Agency expands this argument on appeal to assert that use of Respirator-
1 would pose a “direct threat”, we find the its application of such legal theory to be misplaced. A
person is a “direct threat” if he or she poses a significant risk of substantial harm to the health or
safety of him or herself or others which cannot be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level
by reasonable accommodation. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r). A finding of “direct threat” must be based
on an individualized assessment of the individual that takes into account: (1) the duration of the
risk, (2) the nature and severity of the potential harm, (3) the likelihood that the potential harm
will occur, and (4) the imminence of the potential harm, 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r). See Chevron
U.S.A. Inc. v. Echazabal, 536 U.S. 73 (2002); Cook v. State of RI, Dep't of Mental Health
Retardation and Hosp., 10 F.3d 17 (1st Cir. 1993). A determination of significant risk cannot be
based merely on an employer's subjective evaluation, or, except in cases of a most apparent
nature, merely on medical reports. In this case, the Agency argues that Complainant’s use of a
particular accommodation creates a direct threat. It asserts on appeal that FOH’s evaluation of
Respirator-1 concluded that its use would pose a direct threat. However, a review of the FOH
communication reveals that it did not believe that Respirator-1 would benefit Complainant and it
“might” induce harm – far short of posing a “direct threat”.
                                               8                                   2020000972

For example, Complainant’s preferred accommodation was containment of the irritant chemicals
by spraying them within a fume hood or cabinet, rather than in the open where a fan blew the
chemicals to Complainant’s work area. While the Agency asserts on appeal that it does not
control the facilities where Agency employees perform their inspection duties, correspondence
between Complainant and the Agency’s Occupational Safety and Health Specialist reflects that
the Agency is still obligated to provide its employees with safe and healthy working conditions.
There is no evidence that the Agency even raised the matter with the plant’s management or
owner. 4 Complainant also suggested he return to a facility he had previously worked, in Arcadia
or Barron, Wisconsin, where the irritants were not used or were contained. The Agency
counters, on appeal, that it could not detail Complainant to the alternative facilities because
doing so would impact his pre-existing accommodations. Instead, the option should have been
explored during the interactive process. As noted by Complainant, on appeal, implicit with his
suggestion was that it was compatible with his other accommodations. 5 Again, if the Agency
had made good faith efforts to engage in the interactive process these options would have been
assessed.

Finally, by failing to prove that the reasonable accommodations proposed by Complainant and
his doctor would be ineffective or create an undue hardship the Agency erred in considering
reassignment. Generally, reassignment is the reasonable accommodation of last resort and should
be considered only when (1) there are no effective accommodations that would enable an
employee to perform the essential functions of his or her current position or (2) accommodating
the employee in the current position would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. Part 1630. App. §
1630.2(n); Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation, “Reassignment”.

Based on our finding that the Agency failed to make good faith efforts to reasonably
accommodate Complainant, we will remand the matter for a supplemental investigation into
whether Complainant is entitled to compensatory damages. Under Section 102 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, compensatory damages may be awarded for pecuniary losses, emotional
pain, suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, and loss of enjoyment of life. 6




4
  While the instant EEO complaint is limited to consideration of Rehabilitation Act violations,
medical documentation within the instant record indicates that workplace exposure to the
chemical irritants caused Complainant’s impairment.
5
 Complainant current assignment to the West Liberty facility allowed him to attend regular
medical appointments. If moved to a Wisconsin facility, Complainant suggested he could use
FMLA for such appointments.
6
  We need not address the additional basis of reprisal because it would not impact the remedy.
See Williams v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01944389 (Apr. 11, 1996) (other bases of
discrimination not addressed where disability discrimination found).
                                               9                                    2020000972

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we REVERSE the
Agency’s final decision finding of no discrimination. The case is REMANDED to the Agency
for further processing in accordance with this decision and the ORDER below.

                                            ORDER

The Agency is ORDERED to take the following action:

    1. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, conduct a
       supplemental investigation to determine whether Complainant is entitled to
       compensatory damages and if so, the amount of damages Complainant is entitled
       for this violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

       a. Notify Complainant of his right to submit objective evidence based our
          guidance in Carle v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5,
          1993) 7 and request objective evidence from Complainant in support of
          compensatory damages (providing an option and instructions to request an
          extension in the case of extenuating circumstances).

       b. Issue a written decision on the results of the investigation to Complainant with
          appeal rights to this Commission.

       c. Pay Complainant the determined amount of compensatory damages. If there is
          a dispute regarding the exact amount of compensatory damages, the Agency
          shall issue a check to the Complainant for the undisputed amount.
          Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in
          dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the
          Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled
          “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.”

    2. Within 90 calendar days from the date this decision is issued, provide at least
       eight hours of in-person training to Manager-Y and RA-Advisor regarding their
       responsibilities under the Rehabilitation Act with special emphasis on the



7
  For more information on determining compensatory damages: EEOC Management Directive
110, Ch. 11 § VII (August 5, 2015), available at https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/directives/md-
110_chapter_11.cfm (provides the types of compensatory damages available under Title VII and
“Objective Evidence” of entitlement); and N. Thompson, Compensatory Damages in the Federal
Sector: An Overview, EEOC Digest Vol. XVI, No. 1 (Winter 2005) available
at https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/digest/xvi-1.cfm#article (explains Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy,
under the subsection “Proof of Damages”).
                                               10                                    2020000972

        Agency's obligation to provide reasonable accommodations and engage in the
        interactive process.

   3. Within 30 calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      post a notice in accordance with the paragraph below.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at the West Liberty Foods Meat Processing Plant, West Liberty,
Iowa, copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's
duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for
60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted
to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the
Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The
report must be in digital format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored.
                                                11                                    2020000972

Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report
in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s
final report must contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the
Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                                 12                                     2020000972

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 13                                     2020000972

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 16, 2021
Date
