             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Tim H., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                   Denis R. McDonough,
                                         Secretary,
                               Department of Veterans Affairs
                             (Veterans Benefits Administration),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2021003194

                             Agency No. 2003-0010-2021100541

                                         DECISION

On June 2, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
May 6, 2021 final decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
claiming employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                      BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant was an applicant for Agency employment.
Complainant’s application was processed at the Agency’s Human Resources Management and
Consulting Services (HRMACS), Human Resources Operations Office (HROO), in Austin,
Texas.

On October 20, 2020, Complainant was informed via email that he was not considered for the
position to which he applied because he did not meet the area of consideration requirements as
specified in the announcement.

On December 7, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging the Agency
discriminated against him on based on disability (chronic back pain, diagnosed as Degenerative


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2021003194

Disc Disease) when he was found ineligible for the IT (Information Technology) Project
Manager position, vacancy announcement number CARX-20-10919359-LRc.

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of
investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). The record contains no documentation on
the matter of whether Complainant either requested a hearing within the time frame provided in
29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f) or if he requested a final agency decision (FAD). However, there is
nothing in the record or alleged by Complainant to suggest he requested a hearing. The Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), finding no discrimination was
proven by Complainant. 2

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant states that the Vacancy listed the area of
consideration to be Career transition, individuals with disabilities, internal to Agency, and
Veterans. Complainant states that he is both an individual with a disability and a Veteran.
Complainant avers that he was found ineligible and he was notified, after seeking clarification,
that the area of consideration for Veterans was 30% Disabled Veterans. Complainant states that
the FAD references the use of the Disabled Veterans Hiring Authority (DVHA), but that the
Vacancy advertised as open to Veterans and not using the DVHA. Complainant argues that the
Veterans’ preference is what was listed on the Vacancy, and therefore the Veterans’ preference is
what should have been considered in determining Complainant’s eligibility for the Vacancy.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail,
he or she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited
consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the
agency to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas
Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has
met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St.
Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.


2
  We do note that both Complainant on appeal and the Agency in its opposition to the appeal
refer to the “AJ’s decision.” The final decision was issued by the Agency’s Office of
Employment Discrimination Complainant Adjudication Acting Director. As already determined,
the record does not reflect that a hearing was requested or that this matter was before an EEOC
Administrative Judge.
                                               3                                    2021003194

Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

We presume, for purposes of analysis only and without so finding, that Complainant is an
individual with a disability. However, the responsible Agency officials articulated a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for deeming Complainant ineligible for the Vacancy. Agency
witnesses stated that applicants to the Vacancy were eligible as Disabled Veterans, under the
Disabled Veterans Hiring Authority (DVHA) with a disability rating of 30% and more, among
other categories. The Agency stated that the other eligibility certifications were Agency
employees and career transition. The record shows that the Vacancy announcement listed career
transition, individuals with disabilities, internal to agency, and Veterans.

After receiving notification that he was deemed ineligible for the Vacancy, Complainant
contacted the Agency’s Human Resources Consultant (HRC). The HRC responded in an email
and informed Complainant that the Vacancy’s area of consideration for Veterans was 30%
Disabled Veterans, and that “[u]pon review of the posting this was not made clear in the
announcement.” The HRC also apologized and stated that “the way the vacancy was posted there
is no legal authority under which [the agency] can hire [Complainant].” Complainant continued
to exchange emails, and the HRC stated that Complainant responded “yes” in the eligibility
section when asked if he was a facility employee or a 30% or more Disabled Veteran, but that
the submitted documentation did not support either assertion. Complainant argued that he should
have been eligible because the announcement did not clearly state the DVHA, but instead said
Veterans and individuals with disabilities, both of which he demonstrated he is.

On appeal, Complainant argues his Veteran’s preference should have been used, making him
eligible for the Vacancy, and that the use of the DVHA was incorrect. However, Complainant
bears the burden to demonstrate that the Agency’s articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory
rationale is pretext for discrimination against him, based on his physical disability.       We
acknowledge that both the record and the Agency indicate that the Vacancy announcement was
not clear. This lack of precise clarity, however, does not equate to unlawful discrimination
against Complainant due to his statutorily protected basis. Complainant has not met his burden to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s articulated rationale is pretext
for discriminatory animus.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we AFFIRM the
Agency’s finding of no discrimination.
                                                4                                    2021003194


                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required. Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted
together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(c).
                                                5                                     2021003194

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations



July 20, 2021
Date
