             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                         Mark D., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                    Merrick B. Garland,
                                      Attorney General,
                                   Department of Justice
                              (Federal Bureau of Investigation),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020003543

                                 Agency No. FBI201500088

                                         DECISION

Complainant filed the instant appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 28, 2020 final decision concerning his award of compensatory damages regarding his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of
Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq. The Agency’s decision regarding compensatory damages is AFFIRMED.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Automotive
Mechanic, WG-10, in the St. Louis Division.

On April 2, 2015, Complainant filed his complaint alleging disability when on October 30, 2014,
the Agency rescinded its job offer for the Electronics Technician position in the St. Louis
Division, and on December 11, 2014, his appeal of that rescission was denied.

Following an investigation into Complainant’s complaint, he requested a final Agency decision
without a hearing. On June 6, 2016, the Agency issued its final decision finding no
discrimination regarding the complaint. Complainant appealed the decision.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                     2020003543

The Commission, in EEOC Appeal No. 0120162225 (July 27, 2018), reversed the Agency’s final
decision and found that Complainant was discriminated against based on disability. Therein, the
Commission ordered the Agency to take the following remedial actions, in part:

   1. Within 60 days of receipt of this Order, the Agency shall offer Complainant reinstatement
      into the position of Electronics Technician in the St. Louis Field Office of the FBI located
      in St. Louis, Missouri. The Agency shall afford Complainant 15 days to determine
      whether to accept reinstatement. Should Complainant reject the offer of reinstatement,
      Complainant's entitlement to back pay shall terminate as of the date of his rejection.

   2. Within 60 days of receipt of this Order, the Agency shall determine the appropriate
      amount of back pay, with interest, and other benefits due to Complainant, pursuant to 29
      C.F.R. § 114.501. The back pay period shall start on December 11, 2014 through the date
      of acceptance or rejection of the Agency’s offer of reinstatement set forth in paragraph 1
      above. Complainant shall cooperate in the Agency's efforts to compute the amount of
      back pay and benefits due and shall provide all relevant information requested by the
      Agency. If there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of back pay and/or benefits, the
      Agency shall issue a check to Complainant for the undisputed amount within 90 calendar
      days of the date the Agency determines the amount it believes to be due. Complainant
      may petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for
      clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the address
      referenced in the statement entitled, “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.”

   3. The Agency shall also pay compensation for the adverse tax consequences of receiving
      back pay as a lump sum. Complainant has the burden of establishing the amount of
      increased tax liability, if any. Once the Agency has calculated the proper amount of back
      pay, Complainant shall be given the opportunity to present the Agency with evidence
      regarding the adverse tax consequences, if any, for which Complainant shall then be
      compensated.

   4. Within 90 days of receipt of this Order, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
      investigation with respect to Complainant’s claim of compensatory damages. The
      Agency shall allow Complainant to present evidence in support of his compensatory
      damages claim. See Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993).
      Complainant shall cooperate with the Agency in this regard. The Agency shall issue a
      final decision addressing the issues of compensatory damages no later than 30 days after
      the completion of the investigation.

   5. Within 90 days of receipt of this Order, the Agency shall provide eight hours of in-person
      or interactive EEO training for MDO, MEDCHIEF and HR on the Rehabilitation Act.
      The training shall emphasize the Rehabilitation’s Act's requirements with respect to the
      use of fitness-for-duty examinations and other selection criteria to ensure that similar
      violations do not occur.
                                                 3                                      2020003543

   6. Within 60 days of receipt of this Order, the Agency shall consider taking appropriate
      disciplinary action against MDO, MEDCHIEF and HR. If the Agency decides to take
      disciplinary action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take
      disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline.
      If any of the responsible management officials or employees have left the Agency's
      employment, the Agency shall furnish documentation of their departure date(s).

   7. The Agency shall immediately post a notice in accordance with this decision.

On February 4, 2019, Complainant filed a petition for enforcement of the Commission’s
foregoing Order. Specifically, Complainant claimed that he would have been promoted to a GS-
12, step 3, absent the discrimination; he was entitled to the restoration of 86 hours of annual
leave and 127 hours of sick leave; he should be reimbursed for transportation (a vehicle and
Agency paid gas); back pay at the GS-12, step 3, after December 9, 2018; and he was entitled to
higher performance ratings. The Commission docketed Complainant’s petition under EEOC
Petition No. 2019001549.

Meanwhile, on February 5, 2019, the Agency issued its final decision concerning Complainant’s
compensatory damages and his restoration of sick leave. The Agency stated that on November
14, 2018, Complainant submitted his email requesting a maximum award of $300,000.00 for
emotional distress; future pecuniary damages; restoration of 86 hours of annual leave and 104
hours of sick leave; and a past pecuniary damages award of $20,595.00 for medical visits and
tests. The Agency indicated that Complainant also submitted: invoices from a medical clinic
dated March 15, 2017, and September 26 and 27, 2018; two medical invoices dated February 27
and March 15, 2017; and a Psychology Initial Evaluation Note dated November 20, 2018.
Considering the evidence submitted by Complainant and his pre-existing conditions, ventricular
arrhythmia and sleep apnea, the Agency concluded that he was entitled to $10,000.00 for
nonpecuniary, compensatory damages and the restoration of 40 hours of sick leave. The Agency
concluded that Complainant was not entitled to pecuniary damages.

On February 19, 2019, Complainant appealed the Agency’s February 5, 2019 decision. On
appeal, Complainant claimed that the Agency failed to perform the supplemental investigation
and failed to allow his coworkers to write statements in support of his compensatory damages.
The Commission docketed this appeal under EEOC Appeal No. 2019003361.

The Commission, consolidating Complainant’s Petition No. 2019001549 and Appeal No.
2019003361 (October 24, 2019), granted the petition, in part, and vacated the appeal. Regarding
the matters claimed in the petition, the Commission found that the Agency was required to pay
Complainant backpay and other benefits, including the reimbursement for commuting costs to
and from work and the use of a car. The Commission however found that Complainant was not
entitled to the restoration of annual leave (86 hours) or sick leave (126 hours) as part of his
backpay award or the change of his Performance Appraisal Reports to higher ratings.
                                                4                                      2020003543

Regarding Complainant’s claim of a promotion to the GS-12, step 3, the Commission remanded
the subject matter to the Agency due to insufficient evidence in the record to determine whether
Complainant was entitled to that promotion.

Regarding Complainant’s compensatory damages award, the Commission found that there was
insufficient evidence in the record to make a determination. Specifically, the Commission stated
that the record was devoid of: Complainant’s November 14, 2018 email in support of his
compensatory damages claim; all of his underlying evidence provided to the Agency in support
of his compensatory damages claim; and the Agency’s December 4, 2018 brief in response to his
request for compensatory damages. Thus, the Commission vacated the Agency’s February 5,
2019 final decision concerning Complainant’s compensatory damages and remanded the matter
for further processing. Specifically, the Commission ordered the Agency to take the following
remedial actions to the extent it had not already done so:

   (1) As set forth in EEOC Appeal. No. 0120162225 (July 27, 2018), within 30 days of receipt
       of this Order, the Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with
       interest, and other benefits due to Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §1614.501. Part of
       the Agency’s efforts shall include, but is not limited to, determining the appropriate
       amount of reimbursed transportation costs due to Complainant. Complainant shall
       cooperate in the Agency's efforts to compute the amount of back pay and benefits due
       and shall provide all relevant information requested by the Agency. If there is a dispute
       regarding the exact amount of back pay and/or benefits, the Agency shall issue a check to
       Complainant for the undisputed amount within 60 calendar days of the date the Agency
       determines the amount it believes to be due. Complainant may petition for enforcement
       or clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement
       must be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement
       entitled, “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.”

   (2) Within 60 days of receipt of this Order, the Agency shall determine whether Complainant
       would have received a promotion to the GS-12 level had he not been subjected to
       unlawful discrimination and place Complainant at the appropriate grade level.
       Complainant’s grade level should reflect the grade level he likely would have risen to by
       his “reinstatement start-date” assuming he started his position on December 11, 2014
       (i.e., the date the Agency denied Complainant’s appeal after receiving sufficient medical
       information) at the GS-7 grade level. The Agency shall look to similarly situated
       comparison employees, especially Comparator. The Agency shall provide evidence of the
       exact date that Complainant commenced his reinstated position. In addition, the Agency
       shall provide Complainant any necessary training as quickly as possible so that his pay
       status is equivalent to his operational status. The Agency shall then include its grade level
       determination into Complainant’s back pay award.

   (3) Within 90 days of receipt of this Order, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
       investigation with respect to Complainant’s claim of compensatory damages, including
       providing Complainant an opportunity to submit evidence of pecuniary and non-
                                                5                                     2020003543

       pecuniary damages and guidance on what evidence is necessary to prove pecuniary and
       non-pecuniary damages. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Compensatory and Punitive
       Damages Available Under § 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (July 14, 1992)
       (available at eeoc.gov.); See Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC No. 01922369 (Jan. 5,
       1993). Complainant shall cooperate with the Agency in this regard. The Agency shall
       issue a final decision addressing the issues of compensatory damages no later than 30
       days after the completion of the investigation.

On April 28, 2020, the Agency issued a final decision. The Agency stated that Complainant
acknowledged that he was promoted to a GS-12, step 4, on December 30, 2019. The Agency
also stated that Complainant was paid all back pay and other equitable relief in accordance with
the Commission’s foregoing order.

Regarding compensatory damages, the Agency stated that on November 13, 2019, Complainant
was asked to submit detailed information on any emotional distress or other injuries that he
suffered due to the Agency’s discrimination, as well as any documents to support the claim. The
Agency indicated that on December 13, 2019, Complainant, seeking $150,000 for his
compensatory damages, submitted: a Veterans Affairs Problem List medical documentation; his
doctor’s November 20, 2018 assessment report; and statements from two coworkers, his best
friend, and his brother.

The Veterans Affairs Problem List, dated December 13, 2019, reflects that Complainant had
medical conditions, including prescribed medications, for: eosinophilic esophagitis on October 7,
2019, hyperlipidemia on March 6, 2019, obstructive sleep apnea of adult on March 10, 2017,
gastroesophageal reflux disease on January 7, 2019, and impotence on January 7, 2016.

The November 20, 2018 assessment report indicates that Complainant was evaluated by a
psychologist on that day for 30 minutes. In the report, the psychologist noted that Complainant
had a service-connected disability; he was diagnosed for adjustment disorder with anxiety,
including ventricular arrhythmias (sustained), deformity of the penis, chest pain, dyslipidemia,
gastroesophageal reflux disease, paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, impotence,
obstructive sleep apnea of adult, difficulty concentrating, decreased appetite, losing hair and
graying, stomach distress, anxious, feeling singled out and targeted by employer, and panic
attacks; he denied any current suicidal ideation or any history of suicide attempts; and his sister
died on September 11, 2018, from a heart attack and she was a second mom to him.

Complainant’s coworker (C1) stated in his November 15, 2019 statement that he worked with
Complainant at the Agency since 2010. C1 indicated that Complainant told him that he had
sleepless nights, marital strain, digestive issues, and he contemplated suicide. C1 stated that
Complainant had a mild panic attack and C1 had to drive him to the hospital; he sought daily
counseling from the Employee Assistance Program (EAP); and his not getting the position
affected his health, appearance, emotional wellbeing, professional relationships, morale and
marriage.
                                                 6                                      2020003543

Complainant’s best friend stated in his November 15, 2019 statement that Complainant stopped
playing pool and racing his car; and he was aging, not sleeping well, anxious, and depressed.
The friend indicated that Complainant told him that: he used to go to counseling daily; people at
work were calling him names and making jokes about a disability he did not want anyone to
know he had; and he was prevented from any upward mobility because of disability.

Complainant’s coworker (C2) stated in his November 19, 2019 statement that he worked with
Complainant over ten years. C2 indicated that Complainant told C2 of his loss of sleep and
appetite, marital strain, and thoughts of suicide. C2 stated that Complainant was depressed,
anxious, angry, and frustrated.

Complainant’s brother stated in his November 19, 2019 statement that after the Agency’s
rescission of the position at issue, Complainant developed gastric reflux and severe heart burn
for which he took medication; he developed adult sleep apnea; he had hair loss; his hair was
thinning and graying; he had marital issues; and he stopped racing his car. Complainant’s
brother indicated that Complainant told him that he was contemplating running away or
committing suicide.

In his December 13, 2019 statement, Complainant indicated that $150,000.00 was a reasonable
amount of nonpecuniary damages for the distress he endured because of the discrimination.
Specifically, Complainant indicated that he had none of the physical, mental, as well as medical
conditions and manifestations prior to the Agency’s decision rescinding his position offer.
Complainant stated that he had sleeplessness, anxiety, depression, marital strain, sexual
dysfunction, humiliation, emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, nervous
breakdowns, thoughts of suicide, loss of self-worth, hair loss, hair graying, feelings of being
ostracized, posttraumatic stress disorder, physical illnesses, digestive and gastrointestinal issues,
and appetite issues; his professional and personal relationships being ruined; his professional
development was hindered and stagnant; he was becoming uncontrollably emotional at times and
socially withdrawn; and he sought the EAP for counseling almost daily.

Based on the foregoing evidence and supporting documentations submitted by Complainant, the
Agency stated that an award of $15,000.00 was appropriate for his compensatory damages. The
Agency indicated that Complainant had a serious preexisting condition, ventricular arrhythmia,
as well as adult sleep apnea. However, stated the Agency, Complainant failed to provide any
evidence that his preexisting conditions were worsened because of the discrimination; or that his
medical conditions, including impotency, sleep apnea, eosinophilic esophagitis, high cholesterol,
gastrointestinal disorders, and heart condition, were caused by the discrimination.

Specifically, the Agency indicated that although C1 stated that Complainant had a mild panic
attack at work, C1 failed to provide any details of when Complainant had the panic attack or
what Complainant was doing at the time of the attack or whether it was connected to the
harassment Complainant had been experiencing.
                                                7                                     2020003543

The Agency also indicated that although Complainant claimed that he suffered from depression,
anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorder since the job rescission, he failed to show any evidence
that he sought any psychological medical care for these conditions. The Agency stated that
Complainant also failed to provide any evidence that he actually sought EAP counseling. The
Agency also stated that the death of Complainant’s sister was the actual cause of his anxiety
diagnosis. The Agency concluded that the evidence Complainant provided failed to establish
that the discriminatory job rescission in 2014 directly or proximately caused him the kinds of
emotional distress that would warrant an award of $150,000.00 as he requested.

Complainant appeals from the Agency’s April 28, 2020 decision. In his May 18, 2020
statement, Complainant indicates that the Agency failed to conduct a supplemental investigation
and failed to take into consideration the statements and medical documentation he submitted
concerning his compensatory damages. On May 29, 2020, Complainant submits to the
Commission that he is withdrawing his appeal of the Agency’s decision concerning the matters
which the Commission decided in EEOC Petition No. 2019001549. Complainant indicates that
the parties entered into a settlement agreement on May 27, 2020, wherein which the Agency
agreed to pay him $7,545.00 as tax consequences he could or will incur as a result of the backpay
he was awarded. As such, states Complainant, he is appealing the Agency’s final decision solely
concerning his compensatory damages award. The record indicates that Complainant was paid
$15,000.00 for compensatory damages.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Initially, we note that Complainant was promoted to the Electronics Technician, GS-12 position
including back pay and other benefits. The sole issue here concerns Complainant’s claim for
compensatory damages as a result of the Agency’s discrimination. Any other remaining claims
as a result of the Agency’s discrimination, if any, were withdrawn by Complainant.
Accordingly, we will review whether the Agency’s award of $15,000.00 was appropriate for
Complainant’s compensatory damages.

Pursuant to section 102(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, a complainant who establishes
unlawful intentional discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §
2000e et seq., may receive compensatory damages for past and future pecuniary losses (i.e., out-
of-pocket expenses) and non-pecuniary losses (e.g., pain and suffering, mental anguish) as part
of make-whole relief. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(3). In West v. Gibson, 527 U.S. 212 (1999), the
Supreme Court held that Congress afforded the Commission the authority to award
compensatory damages in the administrative process. For an employer with more than 500
employees, such as the Agency, the limit of liability for future pecuniary and non-pecuniary
damages is $300,000.00. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(3).

Pecuniary losses are out-of-pocket expenses incurred because of the agency’s unlawful action,
including job-hunting expenses, moving expenses, medical expenses, psychiatric expenses,
physical therapy expenses, and other quantifiable out-of-pocket expenses.
                                                 8                                      2020003543

Past pecuniary losses are losses incurred prior to the resolution of a complaint through a finding
of discrimination, or a voluntary settlement. EEO MD-110, at Chap. 11, VII.B.2 (Aug. 5, 2015)
(internal citations omitted). Future pecuniary damages are losses likely to occur after the
resolution of the complaint.

In a claim for pecuniary, compensatory damages, a complainant must demonstrate, through
appropriate evidence and documentation, the harm suffered because of the agency’s
discriminatory action. Objective evidence in support of a claim for pecuniary damages includes
documentation showing actual out-of-pocket expenses with an explanation of the expenditure.
The agency is only responsible for those damages that are clearly shown to be caused by the
Agency’s discriminatory conduct. To recover damages, a complainant must prove that the
employer’s discriminatory actions were the cause of the pecuniary loss. Id. (citations omitted).

Nonpecuniary losses are losses that are not subject to precise quantification, i.e., emotional pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional
standing, injury to character and reputation, injury to credit standing, and loss of health. See
EEOC Notice No. 915.302, Enforcement Guidance on Compensatory and Punitive Damages
Available Under Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, at 10 (July 14, 1992). There is no
precise formula for determining the amount of damages for non-pecuniary losses except that the
award should reflect the nature and severity of the ham and the duration or expected duration of
the harm. See Loving v. Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29, 1997).
The Commission notes that nonpecuniary, compensatory damages are designed to remedy the
harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than punish the agency for the discriminatory
action. Furthermore, compensatory damages should not be motivated by passion or prejudice or
“monstrously excessive” standing alone but should be consistent with the amounts awarded in
similar cases. See Ward-Jenkins v. Dep't of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01961483 (Mar. 4,
1999).

Evidence from a health care provider or other expert is not a mandatory prerequisite for recovery
of compensatory damages for emotional harm. See Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 01952288 (Apr. 18, 1996) (citing Carle v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No.
01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993)). Objective evidence of compensatory damages can include statements
from a complainant concerning his emotional pain or suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish,
loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to character or reputation, injury
to credit standing, loss of health, and any other non-pecuniary losses that are incurred as a result
of the discriminatory conduct. Id.

Statements from others including family members, friends, health care providers, and other
counselors (including clergy) could address the outward manifestations or physical consequences
of emotional distress, including sleeplessness, anxiety, stress, depression, marital strain,
humiliation, emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, or a nervous breakdown.
Id. Complainant’s own testimony, along with the circumstances of a particular case, can suffice
to sustain her burden in this regard. Id.
                                                9                                    2020003543

The more inherently degrading or humiliating the defendant’s action is, the more reasonable it is
to infer that a person would suffer humiliation or distress from that action. Id. The absence of
supporting evidence, however, may affect the amount of damages appropriate in specific cases.
Id.

Complainant has the burden of proving the existence, nature and severity of the alleged
emotional harm. Man H. v. Dept. of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120161218 (May
2, 2017). Complainant must also establish a causal relationship between the alleged harm and
the discrimination. Id. Absent such proof of harm and causation, a complainant is not entitled to
compensatory damages, even if there were a finding of unlawful discrimination. Id.; Wilda M. v.
U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 0120141087 (Jan. 12, 2017) (awards for emotional harm
are warranted only if complainant establishes a sufficient causal connection between the
agency’s illegal actions and her injury).

Regarding pecuniary damages, we note that Complainant has not asserted on appeal that he is
due pecuniary damages. To the extent that he is still requesting pecuniary damages, we find that
Complainant did not establish that he was entitled to pecuniary damages because he has not
submitted any documentary evidence of such damages or shown that any such damages were
caused by the discrimination at issue.

Turning to nonpecuniary damages, we find that Complainant suffered some emotional harm as a
result of the Agency’s rescission of the Electronics Technician, GS-7 position on December 11,
2014. Considering the evidence in the record, including the documents submitted by
Complainant, we find that he had preexisting physical and mental conditions before the
Agency’s discrimination. Specifically, the record reveals that a Veterans Affairs cardiologist
indicated in his Progress Notes, dated April 11, 2008, that he interviewed and examined
Complainant on April 10, 2008. The cardiologist indicated that: Complainant had a cardiac main
symptoms of dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, diminished exercise tolerance, and palpitation
(irregular beats) at rest and with effort, particularly with exercise; he had chest pain (with
palpitation); there was one episode of syncope while in military service 5 years ago; and his risk
factor was dyslipidemia.

The record also indicates that on January 20, 2012, Complainant saw a Veterans Affairs
cardiologist for chest discomfort and lightheadedness at peak exercise.

The record indicates that on August 28, 2014, Complainant underwent his fitness for duty
examination by an Agency Health Care Programs Unit. The doctor, who examined
Complainant, submitted his report, dated October 30, 2014, indicating that: Complainant had
medical history of palpitations, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and elevated lipids which were
treated by prescribed medications; he lost consciousness on two occasions; he had problems with
irregular heartbeats on lifting and carrying; and he was granted a 60% service-connected
disability rating for ventricular arrhythmias (sustained).
                                               10                                    2020003543

Based on the evidence he submitted, we find that Complainant failed to show that his physical
and mental conditions were directly related to or exacerbated by the Agency’s discrimination.
Further, there is no evidence that Complainant sought any medical assistance for his emotional
distress or depression he claimed he sustained, or that he sought daily EAP counseling as a result
of the discrimination.

Taking into consideration the evidence of nonpecuniary damages submitted by Complainant, we
find his request for $150,000.00 to be excessive. Rather, given that Complainant had preexisting
physical and mental conditions and having reviewed the entire record and the nature of the
Agency’s violation, we find that the Agency’s award of $15,000.00 in nonpecuniary,
compensatory damages is reasonable and appropriate. This amount takes into account the
severity of the harm caused by the Agency’s rescission of his job offer in December 11, 2014.
See Queen L. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120160554 (Mar. 22, 2018) (complainant
was discriminatorily demoted and otherwise discriminated against; complainant was awarded
$15,000 in nonpecuniary, compensatory damages for depression, anxiety, chronic diarrhea,
nausea, sleeplessness and night sweats; doctor’s letter did not address the severity, nature, or
expected duration of medical conditions; complainant submitted statements from her brother, ex-
husband, niece, and two friends indicating she experienced stress and anxiety as a result of her
work situation); Wilda M. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141087 (Jan. 12, 2017)
(complainant was discriminatorily harassed; complainant was awarded $15,000.00 in
nonpecuniary, compensatory damages for crying spells, anxiety, exacerbated arthritis, and
feeling depressed, isolated, and loss of her self-esteem).

Based on the foregoing, we find that $15,000.00 is adequate to compensate Complainant for the
harm suffered as a result of the Agency’s discrimination, is not “monstrously excessive”, is not
the product of passion or prejudice and is consistent with prior Commission precedent. The
record indicates that the Agency paid Complainant $15,000.00 in nonpecuniary, compensatory
damages and therefore there is no need to order such payment.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision concerning compensatory damages is AFFIRMED.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                11                                    2020003543

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                               12                                    2020003543

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).



FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 7, 2021
Date
