              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Jane S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                          Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                     (Capital Metro Area),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020004704

                                  Agency No. 4K-300-0329-19

                                           DECISION

On May 20, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 20, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the complaint to the
Agency for processing in accordance with the ORDER below.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier at the
Agency’s Post Office in Lawrenceville, Georgia. On November 1, 2019, Complainant filed an
EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of color (White),
disability (knee), and age (55) when:

       1.      on July 12, 2019, Complainant was removed from her detail assignment due to
               timekeeping errors; and


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2020004704

       2.      on July 12, and ongoing, management failed to provide Complainant with an
               accommodation, therefore she felt forced to retire and use 10 weeks of leave prior
               to retiring.

Complainant asserted that she suffered a knee injury in April 2016, and that it will not heal on its
own. She contended that she provided documentation to her manager at the time in support of her
limitation, which was that she could not walk up and down hills. Because delivering the mail
requires Complainant to walk up and down hills, she could not perform the duties of her positions,
and she was detailed as an accommodation.

At some point, Complainant was detailed as an ad-hoc Driver Safety Instructor. The record is
unclear as to Complainant’s physical location or who her supervisors were at the time. The Atlanta
District Safety Manager (Safety Manager) said that Complainant “is a letter carrier whose duties
[she] does not manage.” The Safety Manager noted that, as a trainer, Complainant conducted
classroom, lot, and street training for new hires and employees requiring refresher training.
Complainant worked depending on the number of newly-hired drivers.

Complainant asserted that her detail ended on July 12, 2019, and she returned to Lawrenceville.
In her affidavit, Complainant explained that a manager said her detail ended because she
committed several timekeeping errors, including that she did not clock out or in for lunch on July
6, 2019. Complainant claimed that she was assigned to perform street observations and asked
about clock rings, but another employee said not to worry about it. Complainant further alleged
that she spoke with another employee while she was detailed who said that another city carrier
committed far more timekeeping infractions than she did but did not suffer similar adverse actions.

The Safety Manager explained that she had discussed Complainant’s failure to properly enter her
time for about eight months, but Complainant continued to have timekeeping problems, so she was
removed from her assignment. However, the Safety Manager admitted that she did not have access
to Complainant’s time records, and that access remained with managers at Complainant’s home
station, which was Lawrenceville.

When Complainant returned to Lawrenceville, she told her manager that she could not carry her
route because of her knee. Complainant contended that her manager said, “I know, but you’re a
short timer anyway.” Upon her return to Lawrenceville, Complainant claimed she had no work to
do. Complainant said she was forced to take leave because she needed a paycheck, and therefore
had “no choice other than to retire.”

The Agency did not obtain affidavits from any management at Lawrenceville or otherwise seek
further documentation from either side.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant responded that the report of
investigation was inadequate and did not contain information relevant to her claim.
                                                3                                     2020004704

Complainant asked the Agency to investigate further by obtaining time records related to her and
to two other employees. The Agency construed Complainant’s response as a failure to request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f) and issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant maintains that the Agency failed to conduct a complete investigation. In
addition to her response to the Agency’s report of investigation, Complainant notes that the
investigation did not seek or contain her medical records, which would reveal evidence tending to
demonstrate her disability and related accommodations.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires, inter alia, that the agency develop an impartial
and appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised in the complaint.
One purpose of an investigation is to gather facts upon which a reasonable fact finder may draw
conclusions as to whether a violation of the discrimination statutes has occurred. Id.; EEO MD-
110 at Chap. 6, § IV.B. An investigation must include “a thorough review of the circumstances
under which the alleged discrimination occurred; the treatment of members of the Complainant's
group as compared with the treatment of similarly situated employees...and any policies and/or
practices that may constitute or appear to constitute discrimination, even though they have not
been expressly cited by the complainant.” Id. at Chap. 6, § IV.C. Also, an investigator must
identify and obtain “all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the
outcome.” Id. at Chap. 6, § VI.D.

Upon review, we find that the record is insufficient to allow a determination on the merits of the
instant formal complaint. Here, the record is inadequate as to both claims. With respect to Claim
(1), Complainant is correct that there is no evidence tending to support or detract from her claims
that she was discriminated against when the Agency ended her assignment over timekeeping
errors. At most, the Agency obtained an affidavit from the Safety Manager stating that
Complainant’s timekeeping was handled by management at Lawrenceville, and that there were
errors. However, these records were never produced in the investigation and the Agency did not
make any attempt to obtain information from Lawrenceville management. The record contained
affidavits from Complainant, the Manager, and a Supervisor, Customer Service in Lawrenceville
(Supervisor). Supervisor testified that she had no knowledge regarding Complainant’s allegations
because she was not within Complainant’s supervisory chain until much later. However,
Supervisor identified Complainant’s manager and Postmaster. The investigator did not obtain
affidavits from either person.

The record contains similar deficiencies with respect to Claim (2). The investigation reveals no
attempt to obtain information related to any reasonable accommodation process that Complainant
may been involved with.
                                                4                                     2020004704

As evidenced by her affidavit, the crux of Claim (2) is that the Agency accommodated
Complainant by sending her on a detail that fit her accommodations but when she returned to
Lawrenceville at the end of her detail, the Agency made no further attempt to accommodate her.
However, the record is completely devoid of any information tending to shed light on this
allegation. We therefore find that the record is insufficiently developed, and that a supplemental
investigation is required to determine whether discrimination occurred.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the matter
to the Agency for further processing in accordance with the ORDER below.

                                             ORDER

Within 60 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct and complete
a supplemental investigation that shall include, at a minimum, the following:

   1. Affidavits from all individuals set forth in the affidavits of Complainant, the Safety
      Manager, and the Supervisor as possible witnesses to Claims (1) and (2).
   2. All timekeeping records that are relevant to Complainant’s allegation in Claim (1).
   3. All documents relevant to Complainant’s requests for reasonable accommodation,
      including any documents evidencing the Agency’s response and interactive process
      regarding Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation. These documents should
      also include any medical documents relevant to the request for accommodation.
   4. A supplemental affidavit from Complainant with further details regarding her requests for
      reasonable accommodation and any attempts by the Agency to accommodate her.
   5. Any other affidavits or documentation not specifically requested in this Order, and
      consistent with this decision, which may be relevant in determining the merits of
      Complainant’s complaint.
   6. If the EEO investigator is unable to obtain relevant documentary evidence from the Agency
      or obtain investigative affidavits from relevant witnesses, the EEO investigator shall
      document the attempt(s) to obtain the evidence and/or affidavits and provide an explanation
      of why the documents or affidavits could not be obtained.
   7. Complainant shall have the opportunity to review the affidavits and other evidence and
      submit a rebuttal affidavit.

The Agency shall issue to Complainant a copy of the supplemental investigative file and shall
notify Complainant in writing of her right to request a hearing before a Commission AJ or the
issuance of an Agency decision, unless the matter is otherwise resolved. If Complainant requests
an Agency decision without a hearing, the Agency shall issue its decision within 60 days of receipt
of Complainant's request.
                                                 5                                     2020004704

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case to comply with the time frames contained in this Order.

The Office of Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that
agencies are not making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission Order to investigate a
complaint.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further, the
report must include evidence that the directed action has been taken.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION'S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission's corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit
via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency's final report must contain supporting documentation when
previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant
and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission's order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the
right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission's order prior to or following
an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.503(g).

Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in
accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407
and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is
subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the
Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including
any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                                 6                                      2020004704

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required. Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely
filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request
for reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   7                                      2020004704

                COMPLAINANT'S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180) calendar
days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 27, 2021
Date
