              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Kenny C., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                          Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                         (Eastern Area),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020003664

                                  Agency No. 1C-251-0032-18

                                           DECISION

On June 4, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 30, 2020, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail Handler
Assistant (MHA) at the Agency’s Processing and Distribution Center (P&DC) in Charleston, West
Virginia.

On October 18, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of race (African-American) and color (Brown) when, on or around July
24, 2018, he was issued a Letter of Separation.

The Agency accepted the complaint and conducted an investigation.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2020003664

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing
within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

On February 20, 2020, the Commission vacated the Final Agency Decision (FAD) and remanded
the case with an order to conduct a supplemental investigation and issue a new FAD.

The Agency conducted a supplemental investigation, as ordered, which, along with the original
investigation, produced the following pertinent evidence.

The Agency hired Complainant on May 19, 2018, subject to a 90-day probationary period.
Training records show Complainant completed orientation training and job-related training from
May 19 to 21, 2018. Complainant attested that his day-to-day supervisor was an Acting 204B
Supervisor (Supervisor1) and another supervisor who had since retired and declined to participate
in the investigation. He also attested that the Supervisor, Distribution Operations (Supervisor2)
was his supervisor.

Supervisor1 attested that he could not give an accurate account of Complainant’s work, as he was
only Complainant’s supervisor for a month or so and his memory was vague. However, he attested
that he would describe Complainant as dependable and that his work relations were stellar.
Supervisor1 attested that Complainant was very responsive to what he asked of him and “seemed
like a nice guy.” He further attested that Complainant’s personal conduct was one of the best at
the P&DC, he liked how Complainant carried himself and how he acted, noting that Complainant
was quiet and never complained directly to him.

Supervisor2 conducted Complainant’s 30-day evaluation on June 6, 2018 and his 60-day
evaluation on July 18, 2018. Supervisor2 attested that Complainant’s evaluation was based on
“visual/verbal observation.”

Complainant attested that, during is first evaluation, Supervisor2 stated that he showed no “sense
of urgency” and that he tried to change that perception by working hard, but Supervisor2 did not
explain what he meant.

The Employee Evaluation and/or Probationary Report (Report) dated June 6, 2018 indicates that
Supervisor2 rated Complainant’s performance as unsatisfactory in the areas of work quantity, work
quality, work methods, and personal conduct; it indicates his performance was satisfactory in the
areas of dependability and work relations. The Report dated June 18, 2018 indicates Supervisor2
rated Complainant’s performance as unsatisfactory in every area.
                                                3                                     2020003664

On July 24, 2018, Supervisor2 issued Complainant a Letter of Separation, effective immediately.
The Letter of Separation indicates that the reason for his separation was his unsatisfactory
performance during his probationary period.

Regarding the alleged discrimination, Complainant attested that Supervisor2 made the decisions
on the workroom floor and Complainant and the other Black MHA were made to compete and
treated differently. Complainant also alleged that he was faster than other employees.

One of Complainant’s co-workers attested that Complainant’s work quality and quantity, as well
as his ethics were exceptional.

At the conclusion of the supplemental investigation, the Agency issued a new FAD. The FAD
concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as
alleged.

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant generally asserts that the Agency was not
committed to equal opportunity.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Constr.
Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine.
450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate
responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted
on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

Even if we assume that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, his claim
ultimately fails, as we find that the Agency articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for
its actions. Supervisor2 explained that Complainant was issued the Letter of Separation because
his work performance during his period of probation was unsatisfactory.
                                                 4                                      2020003664

We acknowledge that Complainant’s co-worker attested that Complainant’s work was exceptional.
However, her testimony is insufficient to overcome Supervisor2’s explanation. Although
Complainant has alleged he was discriminated against on the basis of his race and/or color, he has
not established by a preponderance of the evidence, that the legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons
articulated by the Agency were a pretext for unlawful discrimination or retaliation or motivated by
some unlawful discriminatory animus with respect to this claim.

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or the
agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the
applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
                                                   5                                      2020003664

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 26, 2020
Date
