             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                        Lael G., 1
                                       Complainant,

                                             v.

                                     Xavier Becerra,
                                        Secretary,
                         Department of Health and Human Services,
                                         Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2019005931

                               Hearing No. 531-2018-00054X

                              Agency No. HHS OS 0036 2017

                                        DECISION

On September 17, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 16, 2019, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                   ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment and discrimination based on her
disability and religion.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                   2                                   2019005931

                                           BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Public Affairs
Specialist at the Agency’s Office of the Secretary, Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs
(ASPA), Digital Communications Division (DCD) in Washington, District of Columbia.

On March 9, 2017, 2 Complainant made initial EEO Counselor contact. Informal efforts to
resolve her concerns were unsuccessful. On June 2, 2017, 3 Complainant filed an EEO complaint
alleging that the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment and discriminated against
her on the bases of religion (Jewish) and disability (physical) when:

          1.     on September 16, 2016, October 16, 2016, and January 31, 2017, Complainant’s
                 requests to earn religious compensatory time (RCT) was denied;

          2.     from January 10, 2017 to March 7, 2017, Complainant was excluded from the
                 Engagement Team meetings; her feedback was ignored; her responsibilities were
                 reduced; and, she was not assigned priority projects or other duties;

          3.     from January 22, 2016 to March 7, 2017, Complainant was verbally harassed;

          4.     on February 8, 2017, Complainant’s HHS.gov/secretary was removed from her
                 portfolio; and,

          5.     on March 11, 2017, Complainant was terminated from her Public Affairs
                 Specialist Position.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

Responsible Management Officials (RMO)

Complainant listed the following individuals as responsible management officials: the
Supervisory Public Affairs Specialist, GS-15, Digital Engagement Branch Manager (RMO1,
Jewish, disability status not provided); the Acting Content Branch Manager and Deputy Director,
Digital Communications Division (RMO2, religion and disability status not provided); and, the
Director, Administrative Operations (RMO3, Jewish, no disability).




2
    Parts of the record incorrectly state this as occurring on March 20, 2017.
3
  Initially stated as June 5, 2017 in the Initial Acceptance letter. However, Complainant asserted
that it was filed on June 2, 2017, and the Agency accepted the contention.
                                               3                                    2019005931

Religious Compensatory Time (RCT) – Claim 1

On May 29, 2016, Complainant was hired to work full-time (forty-hours per week) as a Public
Affairs Specialist at the Agency’s Office of the Secretary, (ASPA), Digital Communications
Division (DCD). Complainant was to serve a probationary period starting from her hire date. The
ASPA digital work is focused on and defined by quick turnarounds as news breaks on social
media and other media platforms. This meant many projects necessitated fast-paced responses by
ASPA employees.

On July 25, 2016, Complainant was in a car accident that led to a series of reduced hours as a
temporary accommodation for her. Complainant’s reduced work schedule was initially set at 20
to 25 hours a week. While on a reduced schedule, Complainant maintained the position title and
benefits of a full-time employee.

In anticipation of religious observances in September and October, Complainant requested
religious compensatory time (RCT), but was told by RMO3 that she was not eligible to earn
RCT because she was not working full-time (forty-hour work week). The Agency policy stated
that employees could earn RCT based on hours worked over a regular shift. A full-time
employee could then earn RCT, with permission, for any hours worked after a normal forty-hour
work week. Complainant asserted that these denials were unjustified since Agency policy
allowed part-time employees to earn RCT. Complainant also requested permission to work on
Sundays and Federal holidays but was denied. Complainant noted that following the accident,
she received a large portion of donated leave and alleged that RMO3 told her that she could earn
RCT or use donated leave, but not both; that to ask for both was “greedy;” and that the Human
Resources (HR) staff told her she was the “most complicated employee” they have ever had.

RMO3 testified that she reached out to the Office of Human Resources (OHR) and asked if the
accrual of RCT was possible for Complainant given her circumstances. RMO3 was informed that
it was not possible. OHR noted that Complainant was in Leave Without Pay Status for the time
she was not working as part of the temporary accommodation. OHR noted that anytime worked
beyond her medically reduced hours would have gone towards her regular pay. RMO3 noted that
Complainant’s weekend and holiday work request was discussed, and eventually denied as it was
not suitable to the work required of the office.

RMO2 testified that he never treated Complainant differently and noted that Complainant was
provided with more flexibility than other employees. RMO2 testified that Complainant was not
eligible to earn RCT because she could not meet the conditions for accruing RCT. RMO4
testified that “[e]xtraordinary efforts were made to accommodate the Complainant’s requests”
and that “comp time can only be accrued after an employee works over forty hours in a week.”

Complainant noted in her rebuttal affidavit that she was not working full-time due to her medical
disability. Complainant asserts that this meant she was essentially forced to choose between an
accommodation for her disability or for her religion.
                                               4                                   2019005931

Complainant noted that accruing RCT was possible for part-time employees, and that since she
was essentially working part-time, the Agency should have allowed her to earn RCT beyond the
set reduced work schedule hours.

RMO3 noted that Complainant’s timekeeping requirements were new and challenging for the
staff, which required more attention to ensure Complainant was paid on time. However, she
denied that she, nor any HR staff, ever called Complainant a “complicated employee”. RMO3
also denied informing Complainant that she had to choose between donated sick leave or ability
to earn RCT. RMO3 asserted that she informed Complainant that she could use any of the
donated Voluntary Leave Transfer Program hours to help fulfill the forty-hour work week
requirement, and thus allow her to earn RCT. RMO3 noted that the option was declined so
details were never worked out.

Assignments & Work Conditions - Claims 2 – 4

From January 10, 2017 to February 8, 2017, Complainant asserted that she was excluded from
the Engagement Team meetings, her feedback was ignored, her responsibilities were reduced
(such as the removal of the HHS.gov/secretary from her portfolio), and she was not assigned
priority projects or other duties. Complainant asserted that RMO1 informed her that she did not
know how to manage someone who worked remotely; that RMO1 often failed to acknowledge
her during team meetings; and/or didn’t share the white board via either a web cam or photos
when Complainant was on the phone which made working difficult for Complainant.

RMO1 denied the allegations and stated that she had previously informed Complainant of her
desire to try to find a mutual method to visually communicate when Complainant was
teleworking. RMO1 noted that she did not deny webcam usage, but that it was not possible with
the office’s phone set up. RMO1 noted that employees often sent Complainant pictures of the
white board when Complainant wasn’t in the office as an alternative. RMO1 acknowledged that
assignments were frequently moved around but denied changing Complainant’s assignments
because of her religion or disability. RMO1 asserted that any assignment changes were due to the
nature of the office and how fast paced it could be. RMO1 noted that she had previously
managed numerous teleworking employees and never had an issue with teleworking schedules.

Complainant rebutted RMO1’s denials. Complainant noted that her teleworking schedule was
given as a reason for her termination, and a clear indication that the Agency harbored
discriminatory animus towards her based on her disability required accommodation.
Complainant also noted that RMO1 made her teleworking situation more difficult than it needed
to be. For example, Complainant asserted that she repeatedly requested photos of the white board
during team meetings and rarely, if ever, received any.

Regarding the portfolio removal, RMO1 testified that she moved Complainant’s
HHS.gov/secretary portfolio to a higher-grade employee, CW1, after the administration changed.
RMO1 provided that the work product requirements changed for the Secretary’s page, and a
high-profile section needed to be rebuilt with new functionalities.
                                                5                                    2019005931

This required a close coordination with the new incoming political team. CW1 had a record of
immediate responsiveness to management and political leadership requests. The portfolio was
therefore moved to CW1 because of her ability to quickly turnaround requests, and the high-
profile and time-sensitive requirements of the project. RMO2 testified that it was not unusual for
portfolio assignments to change, and that he concurred with the decision to move Complainant’s
portfolio. RMO4 also noted that portfolios were frequently changed due to ASPA’s need to
accommodate shifting priorities, client needs, workloads, breaking news, and staff availability.

Complainant rebutted RMO1’s statement that she did not clearly communicate her work
schedule. For example, Complainant asserted that she always informed RMO1 when she was
starting work on days she teleworked, and that she never arrived later than 10:30am on days
when she worked in the office. Complainant also noted that she planned any breaks around
scheduled meetings and argued that she was always transparent with her schedule. Complainant
also refuted the Agency’s reasons for shifting the project to CW1 and asserted that CW1
received preferential treatment.

Reasonable Accommodation & Termination – Claim 5

On July 25, 2016, Complainant was involved in a car accident where she sustained whiplash and
a concussion. Her doctor initially believed recovery would be fairly quick. Based on the doctor’s
recommendation Complainant was placed on a temporary medical accommodation that allowed
her to work less than eight-hours (approximately four to five hours depending on Complainant’s
ability) a day, take as many breaks through the day as necessary, and to telework four days a
week.

On September 20, 2016, Complainant was reminded of the expiration of her temporary
accommodations. Specifically, that it was set to expire on October 4, 2016, and that if needed,
the accommodations could be extended, or modified. On September 22, 2016, Complainant
provided updated medical documentation to management seeking to extend the same temporary
accommodations, which were approved.

On November 17, 2016, Complainant provided an updated letter from her doctor. The update
stated that Complainant could now work four to seven hours per day, with the same remaining
accommodations.

In December 2016, Complainant again requested to extend her accommodations as they were.
On December 30, 2016, Complainant’s request was approved. The approval arranged for
Complainant to provide a status update on her progress at the end of January. The approval also
noted that temporary accommodations would expire on March 31, 2017 and could be revisited
then.
                                               6                                    2019005931

On January 19, 2017, Complainant submitted a doctor’s note re-evaluating her condition for
continued temporary accommodation. The note requested that Complainant be allowed to work
five to eight hours a day; breaks as necessary; telework four-days a week; and, that the
accommodations would likely need to be in place for another two to three months.

By letter dated March 7, 2017, Complainant was terminated during her probationary period with
an effective termination date of March 11, 2017. The termination letter provided that
Complainant was terminated due to several reasons, including, unreliable work schedule; failure
to complete the full ninety-day telework probationary period; and unresponsive to work needs.
The termination letter stated that Complainant’s full-time position required her to have reliable
time management skills; to react quickly and appropriately when reacting to news about the
Agency on social media; and, to collaborate closely with other teams and team members.
Additionally, it noted that the position required an employee to be actively engaged on their
computer the entire workday, except for scheduled meetings, necessary breaks, or lunch breaks.
The letter notated that Complainant’s “unreliable work schedule has had an unfair impact on the
assignments, projects, and tasks of other ASPA DCD employees; reducing the effectiveness of
individual employees and the division as a whole”. It detailed the difficulty of relying on
Complainant as an available and consistent resource. RMO1 stated that the termination was a
team decision, involving RMO2 and RMO4, and made with consultation from the OHR.
Management stated that Complainant’s religion and disability were not considered in the
decision to terminate her. The termination letter also references Complainant’s accommodation
and stated that “as a permanent accommodation it is not reasonable or feasible in fulfilling the
duties of [her] position.”

RMO1 noted that Complainant had a flexible schedule of working hours as an accommodation.
She recognized that and asserted that Complainant was not terminated based on the need for her
to have the continuing accommodation. RMO1 said that Complainant’s unreliable schedule and
frequent unavailability factored into the termination decision. RMO1 stated that when
Complainant was working, she was not always available, even if she marked herself as available
on the Agency’s instant messaging system (IM). The IM system is relied upon by management
and employees for communication, particularly when an individual is not in the office. RMO1
noted that at times, Complainant would be marked available, but would not respond, and/or
when she called Complainant would find out that she was not working. For example, RMO1
noted an incident on January 27, 2017, in which Complainant messaged her at 10:15am. RMO1
was away in a meeting and responded back at 11:15am. By 11:45am, Complainant had not yet
responded so RMO1 called Complainant. Complainant informed RMO1 that she had been called
to the doctor’s office and had initially contacted her to let her know. RMO1 stated that this
highlighted an issue with Complainant’s schedule. Specifically, the issue was not that
Complainant needed to go to the doctor’s office, but that she had not notified her that she was
not working prior to leaving, and more importantly had not updated her status so others would
know that she was unavailable.
                                                7                                     2019005931

The Maintenance of Certification and Projects Manager 4 (S1) served as Complainant’s
supervisor from August until October 2016. She noted Complainant, along with others, was
reassigned to the Engagement Branch in October 2016 because the work more closely aligned
with the Engagement Branch. While Complainant worked with her, she assigned Complainant
priority and time sensitive projects, but only ones with flexibility around due dates to
accommodate her schedule and the needs of the projects. She noted that there were certain
assignments that she did not assign because they required immediate action and/or personal
presence in the building. S1 stated that Complainant completed the work that was assigned to
her, but that a part-time schedule made it difficult to balance the workloads of an entire team. S1
found the situation reasonable but not sustainable as a permanent solution. She did not find
Complainant’s schedule to be necessarily unreliable. However, since Complainant’s schedule
was frequently unpredictable, it made it difficult at times to assign work. Overall, S1 believed
that management worked with Complainant to accommodate her. S1 did not observe any
management official be aggressive or unwillingly to accommodate Complainant. S1 especially
noted how frequently RMO3 went out of her way to be helpful to Complainant.

Regarding overall work environment, S1 noted that the office had to frequently change employee
assignments for several reasons, such as achievement of better workflow balance, or to meet a
client’s needs. She noted that the work was very high profile, extremely time sensitive, often
unpredictable, and paired with inflexible deadlines. S1 asserted that if there was a high-profile
project assigned to one employee, who could not make an inflexible deadline for whatever
reason, it would have been reassigned. S1 did not believe that Complainant’s religion or
disability were direct factors in her termination. However, she noted that Complainant’s
disability did not allow her to work the full-time position that she was initially hired to do. S1
asserted that Complainant’s inability to work the full-time position likely caused her termination.

Complainant’s coworker, the Public Affairs Specialist (CW) did not know if the basis for the
termination was based on Complainant’s religion or disability, but she believed that management
was frustrated with Complainant’s accommodation. Specifically, Complainant’s teleworking
schedule and limited hours. CW said it seemed that the requests were not well received by
management, or possibly even believed. CW was surprised that management chose to terminate
Complainant instead of working with her as the office did not have authority to re-hire. CW
noted that at the time of the investigation, the office still had not replaced Complainant’s role.




4
 At the relevant time, S1 was the Digital Engagement Branch Manager, and then the Digital
Content Branch Manager.
                                                8                                    2019005931

Harassment

In addition to what was alleged, Complainant asserted that Agency officials further harassed her
when the Agency contested her unemployment application. The Agency purportedly stated that
Complainant was terminated for “gross misconduct”. Nonetheless, Complainant was provided
with unemployment compensation. The RMOs noted were not involved in Complainant’s
unemployment claims.

Post Investigation

On November 20, 2017, Complainant received a copy of the Report of Investigation (ROI) and
expressed several concerns to the Agency, including that she did not have a chance to submit her
rebuttal affidavits. On December 11, 2017, the Agency addressed Complainant’s concerns and
stated that any rebuttal affidavit would be provided to the AJ if a hearing was requested or would
be considered in the FAD if that was requested. On December 13, 2017, Complainant timely
requested a hearing.

In early March 2019, Complainant withdrew her hearing request. On March 13, 2019, the
Administrative Judge (AJ) issued a Memorandum and Order of Dismissal dismissing the hearing
request and remanded the case to the Agency for a Final Agency Decision (FAD) within sixty
days of receipt of the dismissal order without prejudice.

On August 16, 2019, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
The Agency dismissed claim 1 for untimely EEO Counselor contact pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.105(a)(1). However, the Agency stated that the January 31, 2017 request within claim 1
was analyzed under harassment and disparate treatment theories, whereas the September and
October 2016 incidents were considered in the context of a hostile work environment as they
were untimely. The FAD determined that the Agency had articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, and that Complainant failed to demonstrate that the
reasons were pretext for discrimination.

Regarding Complainant’s termination, the FAD noted that the termination letter suggested that
the Agency’s reasons for termination included, amongst other detailed reasons, an undue
hardship on the Agency. The FAD determined that the termination letter satisfied the undue
hardship requirement as it considered an individualized assessment of Complainant’s
circumstances that demonstrated that Complainant’s unreliable work schedule had an unfair
impact on the assignments, projects, and tasks of other ASPA DCD employees. Notably, it
discussed the importance of being quick and responsive due to the requirements of working with
breaking news, social media, and other engagement team colleagues. The decision concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to harassment or discrimination
as alleged.

On August 19, 2019, Complainant’s attorney requested that the Commission sanction the
Agency for failing to timely issue a FAD. A brief was attached detailing the request.
                                               9                                    2019005931

On September 10, 2019, Complainant’s attorney wrote to the Agency detailing deficiencies in
the FAD and requesting that the Agency rescind its initial FAD.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant asserts that when she initially pursued a reasonable accommodation, her former
manager, S1, was supportive and made an effort to ensure Complainant remained an integral
team member. However, Complainant asserts that when RMO1 became her manager, her
workplace changed dramatically. Complainant asserts that RMO1 informed her that she was not
comfortable with Complainant’s reasonable accommodation because she was unsure how to
supervise someone who teleworked. Complainant also notes that she was never informed of any
performance deficiencies or provided with any opportunities to remedy any concerns prior to her
termination.

Regarding the quality of processing, Complainant asserts that there were a variety of errors made
during the investigation. Complainant notes that the EEO Investigator was initially given the
wrong acceptance letter, and she had to correct both the Agency and the EEO Investigator.
Complainant also asserts that she had reserved a right to submit a rebuttal affidavit to the
Agency’s responses during the investigation. However, Complainant states that the EEO
Investigator prematurely closed the investigation prior to allowing Complainant a chance to
rebut. Nonetheless, while Complainant was later able to submit a rebuttal, she found the EEO
Investigator’s actions to be improper. Complainant also asserts that the EEO Investigator
improperly determined that Complainant’s various witnesses lacked relevant information and
therefore did not interview them.

Regarding dismissal of the FAD as deficient, Complainant asserts that the Agency made
numerous errors in its FAD that warrants a dismissal based on deficiencies. For one, there were
statements of how Complainant did not rebut certain findings, when Complainant in fact had.
Additionally, Complainant argues that it was clearly error for the Agency to dismiss claim 1 for
untimely EEO counselor contact. Complainant notes that the dismissal is based on the Agency’s
previously corrected error of notating when Complainant first contacted an EEO counselor. 5
Complainant states that her attorney had to repeatedly correct errors made by the Agency.
Overall, Complainant details various errors that the Agency made that materially affected the
FAD. Complainant asserts that the errors alone are enough to dismiss the FAD as deficient.

Regarding Complainant’s request to sanction the Agency, Complainant asserts that the
Commission should award default judgment in Complainant’s favor due to the Agency’s error in
its untimely issuance of the FAD. Complainant argues that the Agency’s mistakes, coupled with
the errors stated above, warrants a default judgment in her favor as a sanction.




5
 Complainant’s initial EEO counselor contact was initially marked as March 20, 2017, and later
corrected to March 9, 2017.
                                                10                                     2019005931

In response, the Agency provided two response briefs that essentially reiterate the FAD and
assert that its prior analysis was appropriate and that no discrimination had occurred. Regarding
the delayed FAD issuance, the Agency states that while it issued the FAD beyond the sixty-day
deadline, it provided reasonable justification for the delay, namely, staffing issues. Additionally,
the Agency asserts that it issued the FAD just eighty-nine days after the deadline and that
Complainant was not prejudiced by this delay. The Agency asserts that the delay certainly does
not warrant a sanction of default judgment in Complainant’s favor.

Regarding Complainant’s concerns about processing her complaint, such as not including
rebuttal briefs in the ROI, the Agency asserts that the concerns are without merit. The Agency
notes that it informed Complainant on December 11, 2017 that she could provide a rebuttal
affidavit. Instead of timely providing a brief, Complainant waited six months to provide one as
she had requested a hearing in the interim. Nonetheless, the Agency states that as a courtesy it
uploaded the rebuttal affidavit to FedSEP where it could be addressed at the hearing stage.
Overall, the Agency argues that a sanction, such as default judgment, is not warranted for either
an isolated or collective incident. The Agency requests the Commission to affirm its finding of
no discrimination.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Delay in Issuance of Final Agency Decision (FAD)

On appeal, Complainant requests that the Commission sanction the Agency for its failure to
timely issue a final agency decision within the prescribed 60 days pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). EEOC regulations provide that an agency shall issue the final decision within 60
days of receiving notification that a complainant has requested an immediate decision.

We note that our regulations require agency action in a timely manner at many points in the EEO
process. Tammy S. v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 0120084008 (June 6, 2014).
Compliance with these timeframes is not optional; as the Commission stated in Royal v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009), “the Commission has the
inherent power to protect its administrative process from abuse by either party and must insure
                                                11                                    2019005931

that agencies, as well as complainants, abide by its regulations.” Because of the length of time it
can take to process a federal sector EEO complaint, any delays in complying with the time
frames in the regulations can impact the outcome of the complainant's claims. Id.

Here, the AJ issued a March 13, 2019 Memorandum and Order of Dismissal (Order), ordering
the Agency to issue a FAD within sixty-days of the Order. This meant the Agency had until May
13, 2019 to timely issue a FAD. The Agency issued its FAD on August 16, 2019, approximately
three months after the deadline for its issuance. The Agency stated that the delay was due to
temporary staffing shortages and asserted that Complainant was not prejudiced by the three-
month delay. The record demonstrates that Complainant repeatedly argued that the delay was
prejudicial and impacted her rights. We disagree and find that Complainant has not made a
showing that she was prejudiced by any Agency delay. In this case, we find that the Agency did
not act in a manner to warrant a default judgment. See e.g., Josefina L. v. Soc. Sec. Admin.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120142023 (July 19, 2016), req. for recon. den'd, EEOC Request No.
0520170108 (Feb. 9, 2017) (finding that the Agency's 571-day delay in issuing a final decision
did not warrant sanctions, as complainant did not show she was prejudiced by the delay). Jocelyn
R. v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 0120152852 (Mar. 11, 2016) (citing Vunder v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A55147 (May 12, 2006) (declining to sanction an agency that
issued a final decision after approximately 371 days)).

While we will not impose a sanction in the present case since the delay in issuance of the FAD
did not prejudice Complainant or result in an unconscionable delay in justice, we do find the
Agency’s failure to abide by the regulations reflects negatively on the Agency’s support for the
integrity of the EEO process. As a result, we will notify the Office of Federal Operations’
Federal Sector Programs (FSP) which monitors the federal agencies’ EEO programs of the
Agency’s failure to comply with the regulations regarding the timely issuance of its final agency
decision.

Complaints Processing

Complainant raised concerns with the processing of her complaint. Complainant claims on
appeal that the investigation was inadequate, citing the EEO Investigator’s decision to close the
investigation prior to receiving Complainant’s rebuttal. Complainant asserts that even though the
Agency accepted her rebuttal statement, the investigation was clearly inadequate because it did
not initially contain her rebuttal statement. Moreover, due to this error, her rebuttal statement
was not considered in the FAD. Complainant notes that this ultimately made the FAD deficient
because it repeatedly notated that Complainant never submitted a rebuttal when she clearly had.
Complainant also had contentions with the EEO Investigator’s decision to not interview the
entirety of her witness list.

Upon review of the entire record, the Commission is not persuaded that the investigation into
Complainant's complaint was incomplete or improper due to the EEO Investigator’s decision to
close the investigation prior to receiving Complainant’s rebuttal statements, and the decision not
to interview everyone on Complainant’s witness list.
                                               12                                   2019005931

We note that the Agency accepted Complainant’s rebuttal statement after the fact and uploaded it
in FedSep. Despite Complainant’s appellate statements, the Commission determines that the
investigation was properly and adequately conducted. In reviewing the rebuttal statements, we
also find that it was not grave error that the statements were not reviewed in the FAD.

Untimely EEO Counselor Contact – Procedural Dismissal of Claim 1

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1) requires that complaints of discrimination should
be brought to the attention of the Equal Employment Opportunity Counselor within forty-five
(45) days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel
action, within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of the action. The Commission has
adopted a “reasonable suspicion” standard (as opposed to a “supportive facts” standard) to
determine when the forty-five (45) day limitation period is triggered. Howard v. Dep’t of the
Navy, EEOC Request No. 05970852 (Feb. 11, 1999). Thus, the time limitation is not triggered
until a complainant reasonably suspects discrimination, but before all the facts that support a
charge of discrimination have become apparent.

Here, the alleged discriminatory events in claim 1 occurred on September 16, 2016, October 16,
2016, and January 31, 2017, but Complainant did not initiate contact with an EEO Counselor
until March 7, 2017. The March 7, 2017 contact was more than forty-five days after the alleged
discriminatory events on September 16, and October 16, 2016. Therein, the Agency dismissed
the first two dates of claim 1 for untimely EEO Counselor contact but accepted them as part of
the overall hostile work environment claim. Additionally, the Agency accepted the January 31,
2017 portion of the claim for analysis under both harassment and disparate treatment theories.
Based on the record, we find no reason to disturb this procedural decision, and find it was
appropriately reviewed.

Religious Accommodation

Under Title VII, employers are required to accommodate the religious practices of their
employees unless a requested accommodation is shown to impose an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1605.2(b)(1). The traditional framework for establishing a prima facie case of discrimination
based on religious accommodation requires complainant to demonstrate that: (1) she has a bona
fide religious belief, the practice of which conflicted with his employment; (2) she informed the
agency of this belief and conflict; and (3) the agency nevertheless enforced its requirement
against her. Baum v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 01A05985 (March 21,
2002) (citations omitted).

“A refusal to accommodate is justified only when an employer … can demonstrate that an undue
hardship would in fact result from each available alternative method of accommodation.” 29
C.F.R. § 1605.2(c). Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1605.2(d), alternatives for accommodating an
employee's religious practices include, but are not limited to, voluntary substitutes and swaps,
flexible scheduling, and lateral transfers and job changes. To show undue hardship, an employer
must demonstrate that an accommodation would require more than a de minimis cost. Baum,
supra.
                                               13                                   2019005931

In claim 1, Complainant essentially alleged that she was denied a religious accommodation when
she was not allowed to earn religious compensatory time (RCT) while on a temporary reduced
work schedule based on a car accident. Complainant argued that since part-time employees could
earn RCT, she should have been able to earn RCT given her essentially part-time schedule. The
record demonstrated that employees could earn RCT based on the status of the employee, and
any subsequent overages. Accordingly, since Complainant was hired as a full-time employee,
and was always, even while on the reduced schedule, considered a full-time employee, she could
only earn RCT for time worked over forty-hours.

Despite her arguments, the Agency determined, and we agree, that she was ineligible to earn
RCT given her full-time status and medically mandated reduced schedule. We note that while
she could not work an actual 40 hours, she was provided with an alternative to earn RCT by
using her donated leave. However, because the option was purportedly declined, there were no
further details into that option. Based on the record, there is no indication that the Agency
subjected Complainant to religious discrimination when they would not consider her as a part-
time employee for purposes of earning RCT. As for Complainant’s request to work Sundays and
Federal holidays, the Agency stated that the denial was based on the needs of operational
efficiency and employee management. Aside from her assertions, Complainant has not provided
any evidence that the Agency’s denial to work off-shift was based in discriminatory animus.
Furthermore, there is no indication that management denied any religious accommodation
request such as allowing Complainant the ability to take paid or unpaid leave for religious
observations.

Disparate Treatment Based on Disability

Complainant alleges that she was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate
treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, she must first establish a prima
facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an
inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse
employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v.
Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate
responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency
acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

Additionally, to establish a prima facie case of disparate treatment based on disability,
complainant must show that: (1) she meets the regulatory definition of a person with a disability
, 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) she is a qualified person with a disability, 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m);
and (3) she was subjected to an adverse personnel action under circumstances giving rise to an
inference of discrimination, i.e. complainant must make a plausible showing that there is a nexus
or causal relationship between the disabling condition and the disputed adverse
                                                14                                    2019005931

action. See Prewitt v. U.S. Postal Serv., 662 F.2d 292 (5th Cir. 1981); Bridges v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01891679 (Jan. 24, 1990).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

We will assume, for the sake of argument only, that Complainant established a prima facie case
of disability 6 and religion-based discrimination. However, the Agency has articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. For example, Complainant detailed numerous ways in
which she was discriminated against based on her protected bases in claims 2 through 4.
Complainant asserted that she was frequently excluded from the Engagement Team meetings;
her feedback was ignored; her responsibilities were reduced; and, she was not assigned priority
projects or other duties. Based on the record, there is no clear exclusion of Complainant’s
participation in Engagement Team meetings. Complainant was teleworking four days a week,
and RMO1 and her colleagues worked around technical issues by taking pictures of the meeting
white board and sending it to Complainant. Additionally, the Agency detailed the importance of
quick and efficient engagement with employees and assignments. It was noted that at times, it
was difficult for management to depend on Complainant as a reliable source and so, when
needed, projects and assignments were shifted or assigned to meet Agency needs. This was
demonstrated in Complainant’s portfolio change where the HHS.gov/secretary was removed
from her portfolio on February 8, 2017. The record was clear that an incoming administration
was making high profile changes that required an individual who would be available for quick
turnaround. CW1 had a history working on high-profile projects and was considered highly
reliable and efficient. Still, Complainant argued that the removal was indicative of discriminatory
animus towards her. However, aside from her assertions, Complainant again failed to
demonstrate that the reasons provided was pretext for discrimination.

As the employer, the Agency has broad discretion to determine how best to manage its
operations and may make decisions, including how assignments and duties are assigned, on any
basis except a basis that is unlawful under the discrimination statutes. See Furnco Constr. Corp.
v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978); Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253
(1981). An employer is entitled to make its own business judgments. The reasonableness of the
employer's decision may, of course, be probative of whether it is pretext. Therefore, our analysis
focuses on the Agency's motivation, not its business judgment. Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d
1003, 1012 n.6 (1st Cir. 1979).



6
 For the purposes of analysis, we assume Complainant is an individual with a disability. 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(g)(1).
                                              15                                   2019005931

In other words, it is not the function of this Commission to substitute its judgment for that of
management officials who are familiar with the needs of their facility, and who are in a better
position to make decisions, unless other facts suggest that proscribed considerations of bias
entered the decision-making process. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403
(Dec. 6, 1996), citing Bauer at 1048. Based on the record, there is insufficient evidence to
demonstrate that management’s actions were motivated by discriminatory animus.

Reasonable Accommodation & Termination

As a preliminary matter, we note that although the Agency made references to reasonable
accommodations, the focus of its analysis was disparate treatment. However, we determine that
Complainant’s claim, that she was terminated based on her disability and need for an
accommodation, would be better examined under a reasonable accommodation framework.

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination against qualified disabled individuals.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1630. An agency is therefore required to make reasonable accommodation(s) to
the known physical and mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability
unless the agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. See 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1630.2(o),(p); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue
Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation), EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002); Barney G. v. Dep’t of Agric.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120120400 (Dec. 3, 2015).

A “qualified individual with a disability” is one who satisfies the requisite skill, experience
education, and other job-related requirements of the employment position and who with or
without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position. 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). “Essential functions” are the fundamental duties of a job, that is, the
outcomes that must be achieved by someone in that position. Gwendolyn G. v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120080613 (Dec. 23, 2013). The function may be essential because
the reason the position exists is to perform that function. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n).

In this matter, the Agency argued that Complainant was not a qualified individual with a
disability because she was unable to maintain a regular full-time work schedule, as she was
initially hired to perform. The Agency also provided that the termination was based on
Complainant’s performance not meeting the needs of the Agency. The Agency noted that
responsiveness and quick turnaround was highly valued given the work covered by the Agency.
However, Complainant’s schedule, even considering the circumstances, were unpredictable and
unresponsive. The Agency also argued that the reduced hours and telework accommodation were
only meant to be temporary accommodations, and that it was not considered or feasible as a
permanent accommodation. The Agency argued that it would have been an undue hardship
given the nature of the work required of the employees of the Agency for it to continuously
maintain such accommodations.
                                               16                                    2019005931

Complainant has the threshold burden of establishing that she was a qualified individual with a
disability, and that there was a nexus between her disability and her termination that would have
violated the Rehabilitation Act. Complainant argued that she was indeed qualified, that she was
not appraised of deficiencies in her work, and that she regularly updated RMO1, and other
relevant individuals, of her schedule as necessary. Despite her arguments, we find that during the
relevant time period, Complainant suffered ongoing after-effects of a car accident that made
performing the essential functions of her job difficult. As noted earlier, to be a “qualified
individual with a disability,” Complainant must be able to perform the essential functions of her
position, with or without an accommodation. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). The Commission’s
Enforcement Guidance explains that an employer does not have to eliminate an essential
function of a position to accommodate an individual with a disability. Enforcement Guidance at
“General Principles”; Gerald L. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120130776
(Nov. 10, 2015). Some of the essential functions the Agency listed were the ability to work a
full-time forty-hour shift, to be responsive to time sensitive, often unpredictable projects with
inflexible deadlines, and to have a reliable schedule, whether in or out of office. Based on the
record, we find that Complainant has not established that she was a qualified person with a
disability who could perform the essential functions of her position, that of a Public Affairs
Specialist, with or without an accommodation.

We note that in this matter, there were various conflicting statements between Complainant and
the responsible management officials. However, Complainant decided not to pursue a hearing
before an EEOC AJ, and as a result we do not have the benefit of an AJ's credibility
determinations of these conflicting statements. Complainant had to prove, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the alleged discriminatory acts occurred. Here, the evidence is, at best, in
equipoise. Accordingly, Complainant has failed to meet her burden of persuasion. Complainant
v. Dep't of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120122134 (Sept. 24, 2014) (citing
Lore v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113283 (Sept. 13, 2013) and Brand v.
Dep't of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120102187 (Aug. 23, 2012)).

Based on the foregoing and having construed the evidence in a light most favorable to
Complainant, we conclude that the preponderant evidence does not establish that the Agency
violated the Rehabilitation Act when Complainant was terminated from her position during her
probationary period.

Hostile Work Environment

In her harassment claim, Complainant generally alleged that management subjected her to a
hostile work environment through a variety of incidents as detailed above. To prove her
harassment claim, Complainant had to establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either
so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s position would have found
the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was taken
because of a protected basis – in this case, her religion and disability. Only if Complainant
establishes both of those elements – hostility and motive – will the question of Agency liability
present itself.
                                               17                                   2019005931

Under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17 (1993),
Complainant's claim of a hostile work environment must fail. See Enforcement Guidance on
Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Mar. 8, 1994). As already concluded
above, there is no evidence to support a finding that Complainant’s disability or religion played
any role in the Agency’s actions. Moreover, the responsible management officials provided
legitimate, non-discriminatory explanations for its actions. In sum, Complainant failed to prove
that her protected classes played any role in the incidents she proffered as evidence of her
harassment claim.

Moreover, a finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that
Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by
discriminatory or retaliatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding that it did not
discriminate or retaliate against Complainant as alleged.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or
the agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish
that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                                18                                    2019005931

Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 19                                     2019005931

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 15, 2021
Date
