             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Ellan C., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                      Marcia L. Fudge,
                                        Secretary,
                       Department of Housing and Urban Development,
                                         Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020002000

                                Agency No. HUD-00119-2018

                                         DECISION

On January 10, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 19, 2019 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Management
Analyst, GS-13, at the Agency’s National Servicing Center (NSC) in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

Notably, in 2016, Complainant worked at the Agency’s Housing Office in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania and requested transfer to Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, to be near her adult daughter
for mutual familial support. On March 31, 2016, the Agency deemed Complainant eligible to
receive noncompetitive consideration for reassignment and, in November 2016, it transferred
Complainant from its Philadelphia office to a vacant position in its Tulsa NSC. 2 On May 24,


1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, is approximately 1300 miles from Tulsa, Oklahoma. Tulsa,
Oklahoma, is approximately 110 miles from Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
                                                2                                   2020002000

2018, Complainant requested an office transfer, effective September 10, 2018, from Tulsa to
Oklahoma City, citing “ongoing stress” caused by a “hostile work environment.” Complainant
stated that there was no alternative solution. Subsequently, on June 30, 2018, Complainant
requested a transfer from Tulsa back to Philadelphia, citing hardship when her daughter relocated
from Oklahoma City to Philadelphia.

On October 4, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of disability (high blood pressure and gastrointestinal
issues), age (65), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity (witness in 2019 EEO complaint
of colleague) when:

         1.     on June 27, 2018, management delayed Complainant’s hardship transfer
                request,
         2.     September 27, 2017 to present, management failed to engage in interactive
                process or provide reasonable accommodation,
         3.     May 24, 2018 to present, management failed to address Complainant’s
                claim of hostile work environment harassment, and
         4.     on April 1, 2019, management placed Complainant on administrative
                leave. 3

The Agency accepted Complainant’s complaint for EEO investigation.

During the investigation, Complainant stated, due to personal family hardship, she asked to be
“out-stationed” to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to perform the same Management Analyst duties.
Complainant stated that the Agency delayed processing her request and then, when it approved
her request, stated that no vacancies were available. Complainant stated her initial request for
transfer was on April 30, 2018. Complainant stated that she has developed hypertension and
gastro-intestinal issues due to her stressful work environment and that her requested transfer
would help relieve stress by allowing her to be near her family for support. Complainant stated
that she made the request as one of hardship and reasonable accommodation. 4 Further,
Complainant alleged that a male coworker (C1) treated her poorly and spoke unkindly and
unprofessionally to her. Complainant also stated that she was labeled a “troublemaker” in the
workplace. Lastly, Complainant stated that she posted a non-threatening animated video on
social media and referenced the workplace. The post was circulated in the office and
management placed her on administrative leave.



3
    Incident (4) was an amendment to Complainant’s October 2018 complaint.
4
  Separately, Complainant stated, in December 2017, she requested a replacement ergonomic
chair for chronic back pain because her original chair was broken in shipping from Philadelphia
to Tulsa in 2016. Complainant stated that she also requested an adjustable work-station.
However, in her denial of reasonable accommodation in the instant complaint, the focus is on
Complainant’s request for reassignment/transfer.
                                                3                                     2020002000

The Tulsa Supervisory Housing Program Director (S1) stated, since January 2018, she is aware
that Complainant has chronic back pain and, since May 2018, is aware Complainant has
hypertension. Complainant was approved for the hardship transfer program but there was no
vacant position into which she wanted to transfer. Management believed that Complainant
refashioned her hardship transfer request to one of reasonable accommodation once she learned
there was no vacant position for her in Philadelphia. S1 stated that Complainant asked to move to
Oklahoma City and then Philadelphia due to a hostile work environment and she informed
Complainant that she could not approve a transfer because the work in their office is not done in
any other office. Specifically, reverse mortgages are only handled at the Tulsa NSC. S1 stated
that Complainant expressed concern about interacting with her coworkers, with one in particular
– C1. S1 stated that she sought to help Complainant with alternative options to reduce stress,
including adding telework days and relocating C1’s workstation. S1 stated that she placed
Complainant on administrative leave due to “concerns of a potential threat to the health and
safety of the office.” S1 stated that a Tulsa employee showed her a social media post by
Complainant stating, “Me at work next week. Inside joke only for those that [know] me.” S1
stated that the post contained an animated video of a female character pointing her finger as if a
gun at a male character who then grabbed his chest and fell backwards in the video. S1 stated
that the female character then raised her index finger to her lips. S1 stated that she had to alert
and consult the appropriate offices about next steps and placed Complainant on administrative
leave.

C1, the coworker, stated that he rarely speaks to Complainant outside of work-related issues.
Further, C1 stated that Complainant never expressed concern of harassment to him, but she told
colleagues she hates him. He stated that the animated video Complainant posted on social media
was directed at him. The record shows C1 used to sit near Complainant, but S1 moved his
workstation over a couple of aisles away from Complainant.

In pertinent part, the investigative record contains a letter from Complainant’s daughter stating
that she had to return to her hometown of Philadelphia unexpectedly and she and her mom need
each other for support. It also contains an April 30, 2018 letter from Complainant’s doctor
stating:

       [Complainant] recently came to my clinic for follow up of her elevated blood
       pressure that was recurrent since one month ago. Upon discussion it was clear that
       a stressful work environment, no ability to transfer to be closer to her daughter
       and sleeplessness was contributing factors. Home readings have improved since
       starting St. John’s wort for stress. It is noted that readings are much higher in the
       pm after work and better in the mornings.

       After discussion, she will continue with a healthy lifestyle, exercise and take
       supplements to help with stress but I would ask that you consider allowing her to
       transfer to Oklahoma City, to be closer to her family and have a less stressful
       environment at her work place that will help improve her blood pressure readings
       and further improve her health.
                                                 4                                      2020002000

At the conclusion of the EEO investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

The instant appeal from Complainant followed.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Reasonable Accommodation

Under the Commission's regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o)
and (p).

After receiving a request for reasonable accommodation, the employer should engage in an
informal process with the disabled individual to clarify what the individual needs and identify the
appropriate reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation), EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (October 17, 2002); see
also, Abeijon v. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120080156 (Aug. 8, 2012).
Protected individuals are entitled to reasonable accommodation, but they are not necessarily
entitled to their accommodation of choice. Castaneda v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No.
01931005 (February 17, 1994).

The gist of Complainant’s claim is that the Agency denied her request to move from its Tulsa
office to another Agency office (Oklahoma City, then Philadelphia) based on hardship of being
physically distant from her adult daughter. In this instance, her claim is not truly one of denial of
reasonable accommodation. With that said, even if we assume, without finding, that Complainant
is an individual with a disability within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act, we find that
Complainant has not shown that the Agency failed to provide her reasonable accommodation.
                                                5                                     2020002000

Complainant stated that she experienced hypertension and gastrointestinal issues due to
workplace stress and needed to move physically closer to her daughter for emotional support.
Complainant requested reassignment to Oklahoma City and then, shortly thereafter, Philadelphia.
Management stated that it moved the workstation of the coworker Complainant cited as
harassing, offered Complainant additional telework days, and sought to address the cause of
Complainant’s stress. Complainant stated that reassignment to an Agency office near her
daughter was the only solution. Complainant provided medical documentation stating that she
presented with a month of high blood pressure readings, she had some success with homeopathic
remedies in lowering her readings, other lifestyle changes might be helpful in reducing her stress,
and transfer to an office closer to her family could be helpful.

We find that it was not unreasonable for the Agency to attempt to address Complainant’s
allegations of workplace stress with solutions other than reassignment. Reassignment is the
accommodation of last resort. See Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation. The
Agency noted that the duties of Complainant’s Tulsa position were not performed elsewhere.
Assuming Complainant was entitled to reasonable accommodation, she was not necessarily
entitled to an accommodation of her choice. Castaneda, supra. Based on the circumstances
present in the instant case, we find that the Agency did not deny Complainant reasonable
accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

Harassment

To establish a claim of hostile environment harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) she
belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of
unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on her statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or
condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
(5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d
897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also,
Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (March 8,
1994).

Here, we find that Complainant failed to establish discriminatory harassment based on denial of
reasonable accommodation, alleged actions by her coworkers and management, or placement on
administrative leave. Specifically, we find that Complainant failed to prove, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that the actions complained of were based on sex, age, disability, or reprisal.
Even if we consider, individually and in total, the incidents occurred as alleged, we conclude that
a finding of harassment is precluded by our determination that Complainant failed to establish
that the Agency’s actions were motivated by discriminatory animus. See Harris, supra.
                                                6                                     2020002000

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, she
must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas Department of
Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail, Complainant
must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's explanation is a pretext for
discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St.
Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Here, we find, assuming arguendo, Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination
based on sex, age, disability, or reprisal, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for its actions. The Agency stated that it approved Complainant for hardship transfer but
there was no available position Complainant would accept. The Agency stated that it could not
approve a transfer for Complainant to perform the duties of her Tulsa Management Analyst
position somewhere else. The Agency tried to work with Complainant to address her workplace
stress including relocating the workstation of the coworker she complained about most, C1 and
adding telework days. The Agency stated that it placed Complainant on administrative leave
based on a social media post that was potentially threatening to staff and the workplace. We find
that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s actions were based on discriminatory motives.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final agency decision finding no discrimination.
                                                7                                    2020002000

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required. Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the
timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the
request for reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed
after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                8                                     2020002000

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 30, 2021
Date
