             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Michael L., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                        Janet L. Yellen,
                                           Secretary,
                                  Department of the Treasury
                                  (Internal Revenue Service),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020003199

                                 Hearing No. 451-2016-00176X

                                  Agency No. IRS-16-0081-F

                                          DECISION

On April 22, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the
Agency’s April 27, 2020 final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission MODIFIES the Agency’s final order, in part, and REMANDS the complaint for
further processing.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Senior Individual
Taxpayer Advisory Specialist, GS-0501-11, at the Agency’s Wage and Income/CARE Field
Assistance facility in San Antonio, Texas.

On February 14, 2016, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of race (African American), disability, and reprisal for prior protected



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020003199

EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 when:

       1. In October 2015, Complainant’s supervisor [S1] delayed correction of Complainant’s
          annual performance amount award;
       2. On November 2, 2015, S1 denied Complainant access to administrative functions in
          the Q-Matic System;
       3. On November 2, 2015, S1 made comments concerning the impact of Complainant’s
          disability on his work performance;
       4. On December 2, 2015, Complainant did not receive training with the other Senior
          Individual Taxpayer Advocate Specialists on his team;
       5. On December 11, 2015, S1 accused him of lying to the Equal Employment
          Opportunity Office;
       6. During the week of December 21, 2015, S1 reviewed Complainant’s time records to
          find problems with the input of administrative holiday time and tried to make
          Complainant repay the difference;
       7. On February 2, 2016, S1 and other managers reviewed Complainant’s medical
          records and threatened Complainant with termination if he did not sign paperwork
          relating to his workers’ compensation claim within five days; and
       8. S1 continues to unfairly assign and scrutinize Complainant’s work.

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission) Administrative Judge (AJ).
Complainant timely requested a hearing. The Agency then submitted a motion for a decision
without a hearing, which Complainant opposed. Over Complainant’s objections, the AJ issued a
decision by summary judgment in favor of the Agency. On April 27, 2020, the Agency issued its
final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove discrimination as alleged.

The instant appeal followed.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that
a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other
words, we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and Agency’s factual
conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment
discrimination statute was violated. See id. at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo
                                                3                                     2020003199

standard of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions
of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant did not submit any contentions in support of his appeal. The Agency opposes the
appeal and requests that the Commission affirm its final order, which fully implemented the AJ’s
finding of no discrimination.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is
“genuine” if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-
moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp.,
846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the
outcome of the case. In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and
factual conclusions, and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a)(stating that a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on
a de novo review…”); see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (as revised, August 5, 2015)(providing that
an administrative judge’s determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision
itself, will both be reviewed de novo).

In order to successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a complainant must identify,
with specificity, facts in dispute either within the record or by producing further supporting
evidence and must further establish that such facts are material under applicable law. Such a
dispute would indicate that a hearing is necessary to produce evidence to support a finding that
the Agency was motivated by discriminatory animus. We find that summary judgment was
appropriate as the record had been adequately developed and that there were no material facts in
dispute.

Claims 1 – 4 and 6 - 8

Upon careful review of the AJ’s decision and the evidence of record, we conclude that the AJ
correctly determined that the preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Complainant
was discriminated against by the Agency as alleged. Here, Complainant has failed to establish
such a dispute. Even construing any inferences raised by the undisputed facts in favor of
Complainant, a reasonable factfinder could not find in Complainant’s favor regarding claims 1-4
and 6 – 8.
                                                4                                     2020003199

Claim 5

With to claim 5, however, we find that the Agency subjected Complainant to unlawful retaliation
(interference with the EEO complaint process) when Complainant’s supervisor, S1, accused
Complainant of lying to the Agency’s EEO Office. As a general matter, the statutory anti-
retaliation provisions prohibit any adverse treatment that is sufficient to dissuade a “reasonable
person” from making or supporting a charge of discrimination. See Burlington Northern and
Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation
and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, § II(B)(3) & n. 137 (Aug. 25, 2016). Although
petty slights and trivial annoyances are not actionable, adverse actions or threats to take adverse
actions such as reprimands, negative evaluations, and harassment are actionable. Id.

Given the importance of maintaining “unfettered access to [the] statutory remedial mechanisms”
in the anti-retaliation provisions, we have found a broad range of actions to be retaliatory. For
example, we have held that a supervisor threatening an employee by saying, “What goes around,
comes around” when discussing an EEO complaint constitutes reprisal. Vincent v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120072908 (Aug. 3, 2009), req. for recons. den., EEOC Request No.
0520090654 (Dec. 16, 2010). We have also found reprisal when a supervisor accused a
subordinate employee of lying to the EEO Office, as such accusations could “potentially chill an
employee from participating in the EEO complaint process.” See Celine D. v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120150178 (Mar. 2, 2017), req. for recons. den., EEOC Request No.
0520170258 (June 15, 2017).

In this case, the record reflects that on December 11, 2015, S1 met with Complainant to discuss
Complainant’s EEO complaint, after the EEO Office contacted S1 for an explanation as to “why
[S1] had made comments about [Complainant’s] medical disability, when would he return to
work full time or retire since he only worked half a day and do nothing.” ROI at 00365. Though
S1 denied accusing Complainant of lying to the EEO Office, S1 admitted that he “told
[Complainant] that [Complainant] dishonestly fabricated accusations with the whole purpose to
discredit him.” Id.

While we are mindful of S1’s frustration in being named in an EEO complaint, we find that his
comment to Complainant would be sufficient to dissuade a reasonable employee from engaging
in protected EEO activity. As we emphasized in Celine D., supra, the truthfulness of an
employee’s discrimination complaint should be determined through the EEO complaint
adjudicatory process. Given S1’s admission, and our precedent in Celine D., supra, we find that
finding of reprisal is warranted on claim 5. In reaching this conclusion, we considered S1’s
contention that he did not accuse Complainant of lying. H
owever, we see no material difference between accusing someone of lying and accusing someone
of “dishonestly fabricating accusations.”
                                                   5                                     2020003199

We, therefore, conclude that the Agency’s final order in this matter should be modified to enter
the finding of unlawful retaliation as alleged in claim 5, and we find that Complainant is entitled
to compensatory damages to the extent that he is able to show a compensable harm as a result of
the action.

                                           CONCLUSION

We AFFIRM the Agency’s final order concluding no discrimination was established on claims
1-4 and 6-8. However, on claim 5, we REVERSE the Agency’s finding of no violation of Title
VII/the Rehabilitation Act’s prohibition against retaliation, and REMAND the claim to the
Agency for further processing. The Agency shall comply with the relief in the following Order.

                                                 ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions:

      1. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         complete a supplemental investigation concerning Complainant’s entitlement to
         compensatory damages and determine the amount of compensatory damages due
         Complainant in a final decision with appeal rights to the Commission. The Agency shall
         pay this amount to Complainant within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the
         determination of the amount of compensatory damages. If there is a dispute regarding the
         exact amount of compensatory damages, the Agency shall issue a check to Complainant
         for the undisputed amount. Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of
         the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the
         Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation
         of the Commission’s Decision.”

      2. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         provide eight hours of in-person or interactive training to S1. 2 The required training shall
         address S1’s responsibilities with regard to eliminating discrimination in the workplace
         particularly regarding reprisal.

      3. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         consider taking disciplinary action against S1. The Commission does not consider
         training to be a disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the
         Commission and specify what, if any, action was taken. If the Agency decides not to take
         disciplinary action, then it shall set forth the reasons for its decision not to impose
         discipline.

      4. The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the paragraph entitled, “Posting
         Order.”

2
    S1 is identified on page 00354 of the ROI.
                                                6                                     2020003199

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the statement
entitled "Implementation of the Commission’s Decision." The report shall include supporting
documentation verifying that the corrective action has been implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Wage and Income/CARE Field Assistance facility in San
Antonio, Texas, copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the
Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic
format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall
remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices
to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said
notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is
to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation
of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period.
The report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               7                                    2020003199

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                8                                     2020003199

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final action in part, but it also requires the Agency to
continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days
from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which the
Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                       Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 19, 2021
Date
