             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Rosendo D., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                          Janet Yellen,
                                           Secretary,
                                  Department of the Treasury
                                  (Internal Revenue Service),
                                            Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2019005025

                                  Agency No. IRS-13-0657-F

                                          DECISION

On July 9, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 9, 2019, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected him to discrimination and a hostile work environment based on his
protected classes and in reprisal for his protected EEO activity.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2019005025

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Internal Revenue
Agent, GS-11, in the Agency’s Small Business/Self-Employed Division (SB/SE), Examination
Operations located in El Monte, California.

On December 6, 2013, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of disability (physical and mental), age (54), and reprisal
for prior protected EEO activity under when:

       1.      on September 9, 2013, Complainant received a memorandum concerning his
               failure to maintain a regular work schedule due to his absences;

       2.      on September 12, 2013, Complainant received a memorandum concerning an
               unacceptable doctor’s note he had provided;

       3.      on September 16, 2013, Complainant received a memorandum concerning his
               performance improvement plan (PIP) advising that if his performance continued
               to be minimal and his failure to improve may result in various personnel actions;

       4.      on or about September 16, 2013, he received a lowered appraisal rating for the
               rating period ending on August 16, 2013;

       5.      on October 21, 2013, Complainant was excluded from consideration in the
               solicitation for rotational assignments within the Special Enforcement Program
               (SEP) group; and

       6.      on October 30, 2013, Complainant was ranked below the Best Qualified (BQ) cut-
               off score to be considered for selection to the position of Disclosure Enforcement
               Specialist, announced under Vacancy Announcement No. 13CW5-PGN-84-1801-
               12-13J12.

The Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. Between March and July 2014, the EEO
Investigator sought a declaration from Complainant regarding his claims. Complainant never
responded. On June 27, 2014, Complainant’s representative prepared a draft declaration for
Complainant to review. Complainant never reviewed or signed the draft declaration. However,
the unsigned declaration was provided to the EEO Investigator. The investigation concluded
without any statement from Complainant.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.
                                                3                                     2019005025

On September 9, 2013, Complainant received a memorandum concerning his failure to maintain
a regular work schedule due to his absences. Complainant’s first line supervisor, the Group
Manager (S1, over 40, unknown disability status and EEO activity) stated that Complainant had
chronic absenteeism. S1 consulted with the Labor Relations department prior to issuing the
memorandum. On September 12, 2013, in connection to the prior memorandum, Complainant
received a memorandum concerning an unacceptable doctor’s note he had provided. S1 noted
that the provided medical note contradicted Complainant’s work schedule. For example, it
requested that Complainant be excused for days that Complainant had reported to duty, and not
days that he was absent without prior authorization. Complainant did not address the discrepancy
but asserted that he was frequently sick which resulted in unscheduled absences. Complainant
asserted that if he had been reasonably accommodated he could have performed the basic
functions of his job.

On or about September 16, 2013, he received a lowered appraisal rating of Minimally Successful
for the rating period ending in August 16, 2013. S1 noted that Complainant was barely passing
the minimally successful rating due to numerous performance deficiencies. S1 detailed that the
rating was based on case reviews of Complainant’s work and his mid-year review. S1 noted that
in her reviews, she found that Complainant frequently failed to appropriately document time
spent; that he did not properly review and analyze documents submitted by taxpayers; and that
Complainant failed to apply the correct tax law in numerous cases. Complainant’s second line
supervisor, the Territory Manager (S2), agreed with the rating.

On September 16, 2013, Complainant received a memorandum concerning his performance
improvement plan (PIP). The memorandum detailed numerous deficiencies in Complainant’s
work and explained that if Complainant failed to show any improvement during the PIP period
then he would be subject to various personnel actions. Complainant asserted that he was never
given expectations at the beginning of the rating period. Even if he did, the expectations were set
for a “normal, healthy individual without any disabilities”. Complainant again noted that if he
had been reasonably accommodated, he could have performed the functions of his position.

On October 21, 2013, Complainant was excluded from consideration in the solicitation for
rotational assignments within the Special Enforcement Program (SEP) group. Complainant
asserted that S1 and S2 colluded to prevent him from getting an SEP assignment. S1 denied any
involvement but noted that SEP assignments were for GS-12 and GS-13 employees only, and
that Complainant was a GS-11 employee.

On October 30, 2013, Complainant was ranked below the Best Qualified (BQ) cut-off score to be
considered for selection to the position of Disclosure Enforcement Specialist, announced under
Vacancy Announcement No. 13CW5-PGN-84-1801-12-13J12. A human resource specialist
(HR1) working on the vacancy stated that applicants were ranked under three categories: Best
Qualified, Highly Qualified, and Qualified. Applicants had to be placed in the Best Qualified
category to be placed on the Selection Certificate. Complainant was ranked in the Qualified
category and, therefore, not interviewed. He asserted that he would have made the Best Qualified
ranking if not for his biased performance appraisal.
                                                  4                                2019005025

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). A hearing was requested.

On April 29, 2019, the AJ issued an Order Dismissing Request for Hearing and Directing
Agency to Issue Final Decision (Order). The Order was based on Complainant’s ongoing failure
to prosecute his complaint, both when he was represented and after he proceeded without
representation. Specifically, Complainant failed to respond to the Agency’s discovery requests
and ignored the AJ’s order compelling responses. Complainant failed to appear at various
conference calls and disregarded the AJ’s Order to Show Cause for his failure to comply. Based
on Complainant’s failure to comply with the order compelling discovery and failure to show
good cause for not complying with the order, the AJ dismissed Complainant’s hearing request as
a sanction and remanded the case to the Agency for a FAD.

On June 7, 2019, the Agency issued a final Agency decision (FAD). The Agency noted that the
unsigned declaration by Complainant’s representative asserted that Complainant was not
accommodated for his disabilities. However, the issue of reasonable accommodation was not
raised when Complainant filed his formal complaint. The Agency noted that the issue was never
included and, therefore, would not be addressed. The Agency further noted that Complainant had
previously brought forth reasonable accommodation claims in a previously filed claim. The
Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination or retaliation as alleged.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant did not provide an appellate brief.

The Agency asserts that its June 7, 2019 FAD properly concluded that the Agency did not
engage in discrimination. The Agency requests that the Commission affirm its FAD.

                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                               5                                    2019005025

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Claim of Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

During the investigation, Complainant’s representative provided an unsigned statement in which
he raised a new claim of denial of reasonable accommodation. In the Agency’s final decision, it
stated that since Complainant failed to bring the issue of reasonable accommodation when he
filed his formal complaint, the Agency would not address the matter. Upon review, we find that
Complainant did not raise this claim of denied reasonable accommodation during his EEO
counseling, his formal complaint, nor to the EEO Investigator. We note that Complainant’s
representative drafted the statement, but it was not reviewed nor signed by Complainant.
Complainant had requested a hearing but did not raise this claim with the AJ. Finally, on appeal,
Complainant did not challenge the Agency’s failure to address this claim in its FAD.
Accordingly, we shall not address his reasonable accommodation concerns in this decision. 2

Disparate Treatment

Complainant alleges that he was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, she must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S.
567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once
the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the
fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited
reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).




2
 A review of this matter demonstrated that reasonable accommodation issues that occurred in
2012 and 2013 were brought forth in Agency case numbers IRS-14-0081-F and IRS-14-0387-F
which are currently before the Commission under EEOC Appeal No. 2019005548.
                                                6                                    2019005025

For his claim of reprisal, Complainant must show that: (1) he engaged in a protected activity; (2)
the agency was aware of the protected activity; (3) subsequently, he was subjected to adverse
treatment by the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected activity and the adverse
treatment. Whitmire v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000).

Claims 1 – 5

Here, even if we assume, arguendo, that Complainant has established a prima facie case of
discrimination and reprisal, the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
its actions. Complainant was repeatedly counseled by management, both verbally and by
memorandum, regarding his ongoing attendance issues. The record demonstrated that
Complainant had on-going attendance issues, which he acknowledged, and would therefore be
within management’s rights to address. Complainant noted that he had provided management
with a doctor’s note excusing him from unscheduled leave of absences that were subject to the
September 9, 2013 memorandum. However, as S1 noted, the medical note failed to properly
excuse Complainant and was inconsistent with the dates he was not working. There is no
indication that S1 acted with discriminatory or retaliatory animus when she issued the September
2013 memoranda.

Regarding Complainant’s failure to improve on the PIP and the lowered appraisal rating, the
Agency has also provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons. Here, S1 detailed that
Complainant was placed on the PIP due to ongoing performance issues. While on the PIP,
Complainant failed to make any substantial improvements. Since Complainant was not making
the necessary improvements, S1 issued a memorandum to remind Complainant that continued
poor performance would result in a variety of personnel actions. The lowered appraisal rating
was directly tied to Complainant’s poor performance. In this matter, the record demonstrated that
Complainant’s PIP and rating were based on undisputed performance deficiencies.

Regarding Complainant’s exclusion from consideration of the rotational assignments within the
Special Enforcement Program (SEP) group, management detailed that these were only open to
GS-12 and GS-13 employees. Therefore, Complainant did not qualify purely on his GS-11
status.

As the employer, the Agency has broad discretion to determine how best to manage its
operations and may make decisions, including personnel decisions, on any basis except a basis
that is unlawful under the discrimination statutes. See Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438
U.S. 567 (1978); Tex. Dep't. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). An
employer is entitled to make its own business judgments. The reasonableness of the employer's
decision may, of course, be probative of whether it is pretext. Therefore, our analysis focuses on
the Agency's motivation, not its business judgment. Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d 1003, 1012
n.6 (1st Cir. 1979).
                                                7                                     2019005025

In other words, it is not the function of this Commission to substitute its judgment for that of
management officials who are familiar with the needs of their facility, and who are in a better
position to make decisions, unless other facts suggest that proscribed considerations of bias
entered the decision-making process. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403
(Dec. 6, 1996), citing Bauer at 1048.

In this matter, Complainant argued that the reasons provided by the Agency were false and
merely pretext for discrimination. However, Complainant has provided no witness statements or
documentary evidence to demonstrate that management was motivated by discriminatory or
retaliatory animus. Based on the record, there is no evidence to demonstrate that management’s
actions were motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus.

Claim 6 - Non-Selection

Regarding the non-selection, Complainant can demonstrate pretext by showing that his
qualifications for the position were plainly superior to those of the selectee. Hung P. v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120141721 (Dec. 3, 2015). Other indicators of pretext
include discriminatory statements or past personal treatment attributable to those responsible for
the personnel action that led to the filing of the complaint, comparative or statistical data
revealing differences in treatment across various protected-group lines, unequal application
of Agency policy, deviations from standard procedures without explanation or justification, or
inadequately explained inconsistencies in the evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12, 2015).

The record demonstrated that Complainant simply failed to meet the qualifications to be placed
in the Best Qualified category. He argued that had management provided him an unbiased
performance review then he would have made the list. However, there is no evidence that the
performance review was based on anything other than Complainant’s performance. Moreover,
even if his performance review was ranked higher, there is no indication that this would have
necessarily placed Complainant into the Best Qualified category for the position at issue. At all
times the ultimate burden of persuasion remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency was motivated by prohibited discrimination.
Complainant has failed in this regard.

To the extent Complainant alleged that the events raised in claims 1-6 constituted a claim of
harassment, a finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that
Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by
discriminatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21,
2000). As already concluded above, there is no evidence to support a finding that Complainant’s
protected bases or EEO activity played any role whatsoever in the Agency’s actions. Moreover,
the responsible management officials provided legitimate, non-discriminatory explanation for its
actions.
                                                  8                                 2019005025

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final order finding no
discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                9                                     2019005025

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).



FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 15, 2021
Date
