             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                           Genie S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                      (Great Lakes Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020003706

                                  Agency No. 4J-530-0127-19

                                           DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated February 12, 2020, finding no
discrimination concerning her complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and
Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision
finding no discrimination.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was an applicant for
employment at the Agency.

On September 13, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination based on
disability and in reprisal for prior EEO activity when on June 5, 2019, a job offer was rescinded.

After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ).


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2020003706

The Agency issued its final Agency decision concluding that it asserted legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its action, which Complainant failed to rebut.

Complainant indicated that she had type 1 diabetic. The Agency indicated that Complainant
applied for a PSE (Postal Support Employee) Sales & Services/Distribution Associate in
Rockford, Illinois. The Agency made a job offer to Complainant for the PSE position on June 4,
2019, conditioned on her meeting medical, eligibility, suitability, and background investigation
requirements. The next day, on June 5, 2019, the Agency rescinded the offer because it
discovered Complainant had quit her employment at the Agency on three prior occasions.
Further, Complainant’s former supervisor indicated that Complainant had a bad attitude; she did
not come prepare for work; she left without permission on several occasions; and she had a
hostile encounter with other PSEs; and she resigned from the Chrysler Post Office after she was
given her job back. The Agency determined Complainant was not a reliable employee.

Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law").

After a review of the record, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination. The Agency rescinded Complainant’s
conditional job offer when they received a file of Complainant’s prior employment history
reflecting that she quit her job at the Agency on three occasions. Furthermore, we find that
Complainant failed to show that there were any similarly situated employees not in her protected
groups who were treated differently under similar circumstances. Based on the foregoing, we
find that Complainant has failed to show that the Agency’s action was motivated by
discrimination as she alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.
                                                  3                                 2020003706

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                4                                     2020003706

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                       Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 21, 2021
Date
