             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013
                                                      1

                                         Filiberto H., 2
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                  Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                           (Immigration and Customs Enforcement),
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020004816

                               Agency No. HS-CIS-01273-2019

                                          DECISION

On August 28, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
July 28, 2020, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                    ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are whether the Agency subjected Complainant to harassment, disparate
treatment, and denial of reasonable accommodation as alleged.



1
  We note that Complainant identifies as a transgender female. However, during the EEO
investigation, Complainant asked the EEO investigator to refer to him using his male first name
or as “Mr. [named omitted].” See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 5. We also note that
Complainant’s attorney, on appeal, refers to Complainant using male pronouns. In accordance
with Complainant’s preference, we too shall refer to him using male pronouns.
2
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020004816

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Immigration
Services Officer (ISO), GS-1801-07/1, at the Agency’s Vermont Service Center in Essex,
Vermont. He was appointed to the position on June 10, 2018, subject to a one-year probationary
period.

In late July 2018, Complainant allegedly learned that a female colleague (C1) and other
employees were defrauding the Agency for personal financial gain. Complainant stated that he
reported the fraud to management. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 000115. Complainant
claimed that due to his whistleblowing, C1 made an anonymous complaint against him, falsely
accusing him of hating “Hispanics, Blacks, women, Jews, gays, and transgender persons, among
others.” Id. at 000008. In an attempt to defend himself from these accusations, Complainant
allegedly outed himself to his Section Chief that he was a gay, half Mexican and Puerto Rican,
transgender woman who had been adopted. See Complainant’s Appellate Brief at 4; see also ROI
at 000115. Complainant also allegedly shared with his Section Chief that he had mental
disabilities and had been involuntarily separated from active duty military service for committing
a “homosexual act.” Id.

Complainant claimed that he subsequently disclosed his sexual orientation to his Supervisory
ISO a few days later on or around August 8, 2018. Id. at 5. Complainant maintained that during
this time period, he also verbally disclosed to his Supervisory ISO that he had attention deficit
disorder (ADD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and needed reasonable
accommodation in the form of testing assistance. Id. Complainant believed that following these
disclosures about his protected characteristics, the Supervisory ISO began making racist and
homophobic comments about him; scrutinized his work more closely than other employees, gave
him a poor review, and a counseling letter; and denied his requests for reasonable
accommodation. On April 5, 2019, approximately 10 months after his appointment, the Deputy
Director of the Vermont Service Center removed him from federal service during his
probationary period.

On June 6, 2019, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of national origin (Hispanic), 3 sex (transgender female), 4


3
  We note that Complainant raised “Hispanic” as his race. However, we note that the
Commission considers the term, “Hispanic,” to be reflective of national origin, rather than race.
We also note that the Agency disputes whether Complainant is Hispanic, as the Agency claims
that there is evidence in record that suggests that Complainant is of Italian/Irish descent.
However, as reflected in the record, Complainant is half-Mexican and half-Puerto Rican and was
adopted by an Irish/Italian family. ROI at 000043.
4
  In Bostock v. Clayton Cty., the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual
orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590 U.S. ___, 140 S. Ct. 1731
(2020); see also Baldwin v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC Appeal No. 0120133080 (July 15, 2015) (an
                                                 3                                     2020004816

color (white), disability (mental), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Following
amendments to his complaint, the Agency accepted the following allegations of discrimination
when.

       1. Between August 2018 and April 5, 2019, he was subjected to a hostile work
          environment, his Supervisory ISO made racist comments towards him, gave him a
          poor review, and issued him a write up for working past 06:00 p.m.;

       2. Commencing in August 2018, he repeatedly requested reasonable accommodations
          during his employment, but the requests were all denied; and

       3. On April 5, 2019, the Deputy Director of the Vermont Service Center (Deputy
          Director) terminated him from his position of employment during his probationary
          period. 5

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.

On March 2, 2020, the assigned AJ ordered the parties to submit a prehearing statement and a
proposed discovery plan by May 1, 2020, in preparation for the prehearing conference, which
was scheduled on May 8, 2020. Complainant, however, failed to file the required prehearing
submissions by the deadline. The day before the prehearing conference was scheduled to occur,
Complainant contacted the AJ to request a postponement because his representative had fallen ill
with Covid-19 and had suffered a death in her family. The AJ ultimately denied Complainant’s
request because Complainant failed to follow her instructions for requesting a postponement.
The telephonic pre-hearing conference occurred as scheduled on May 8, 2018.

Following the telephonic pre-hearing conference, the AJ issued an order dated May 8, 2020,
memorializing her verbal denial of Complainant’s request for full discovery on the grounds that
Complainant had waived his right due to his failure to file the required prehearing submissions.
The AJ, however, afforded Complainant the opportunity to engage in limited discovery to obtain
all emails between his first and second level supervisor regarding his performance or disabilities.
The AJ also allowed Complainant to request the email exchanges that he had with management
regarding his disabilities and his training time.


allegation of discrimination based on sexual orientation states a claim of sex discrimination
under Title VII because sexual orientation is inherently a sex-based consideration).
5
  We note that Complainant raised a fourth claim, alleging that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination on April 11, 2019, when he was denied unemployment benefits. The Agency,
however, dismissed this claim for failure to state a claim. Because Complainant has not
challenged this determination on appeal, we need not consider it.
                                                 4                                     2020004816

Complainant subsequently filed a motion to reconsider the May 8, 2020 order, wherein he again
requested the opportunity to engage in full discovery so that he could obtain comparator
evidence and search for the real reason for his removal. In requesting reconsideration,
Complainant emphasized that his representative did indeed have a death in her family and was
sick herself with Covid-19. Complainant further maintained that his representative was not
allowed to participate in the conference call.

On May 28, 2020, the AJ denied Complainant’s request for reconsideration. In denying
Complainant’s request, the AJ acknowledged Complainant’s contention that his failure to submit
the required submissions was due to his representative’s personal issues; however, the AJ was
unpersuaded by Complainant’s explanation given that Complainant had failed to file the required
submissions and had only requested postponement several days after the deadline had passed.
The AJ also maintained that she never prohibited Complainant’s representative from attending
the pre-hearing conference call, and she emphasized that she did not even know whether
Complainant had a representative because Complainant did not designate anyone to represent
him or copy his representative in his filings. As for Complainant’s request for full discovery, the
AJ declined to reconsider her decision on that matter, given that Complainant never established a
need for discovery, as his complaint contained only bare assertions. Complainant subsequently
withdrew his request for a hearing.

The Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), which found that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. In
finding no discrimination, the Agency first addressed claim 1, concerning Complainant’s hostile
work environment claim when his Supervisory ISO allegedly made racist comments towards
him, gave him poor reviews, and issued him write ups. Having reviewed the record, the Agency
found that Complainant could not establish that he had been subjected to racist comments, given
that his Supervisory ISO vehemently denied making the alleged racist comments. As for the poor
reviews, the Agency found that the poor quarterly review that Complainant received on January
29, 2019, was due to his failure to attain a 70% efficiency rate. In so finding, the Agency rejected
Complainant’s allegation that the poor review was related to his Supervisory ISO’s failure to
“zero out” his productivity and efficiency statistics to account for a system glitch when everyone
was locked out. Citing to the affidavit from Complainant’s Supervisory ISO, the Agency found
that Complainant’s “access issues were limited to administrative type systems and were
unrelated to the systems required to complete Complainant’s job functions in a training
capacity.” Thus, the Agency determined that there was no causal link between this incident and
Complainant’s protected characteristics. The Agency also found that Complainant’s Supervisory
ISO did not engage in harassment in writing Complainant up for working past 6:00 p.m., as
Agency policy expressly prohibited uncertified employees from working past 6:00 p.m.

With regard to claim 2, concerning the alleged denial of Complainant’s request for reasonable
accommodation in August 2018, September 2018, October 2018, December 2018, and January
2019, the Agency found that Complainant had only filed one reasonable accommodation request
in October 2018, for private proctoring and extended test time, which the Agency granted in full.
                                                5                                    2020004816

The Agency noted that “the record did not contain any evidence that Complainant requested any
additional accommodations, either formally or informally, outside of the October 2018,
accommodation request that was approved.” As such, the Agency concluded that Complainant
failed to show that Complainant was ever denied a reasonable accommodation.

Finally, the Agency rejected Complainant’s allegation of discrimination in claim 3, concerning
his removal from federal service during his probationary period. Having reviewed the affidavit of
the Deputy Director, the Agency determined that the removal action was based on Complainant’s
poor performance in the area of technical proficiency, which affected Complainant’s ability to
provide timely and accurate decisions to customers. Citing to the Deputy Director’s affidavit, the
Agency noted that Complainant’s chain of command had concerns about the numerous errors in
his work product, as well as his inability “to work independently or to follow rules, regulations,
and standard operating procedures regarding immigration law.” Furthermore, the Agency noted
that Complainant’s repeated violated the Agency’s prohibition on working outside of normal
duty hours. In finding no discrimination on claim 3, the Agency considered the two individuals
whom Complainant named as comparators; however, the Agency found no evidence that these
individuals had the same performance issues as Complainant, as the record clearly showed that
both of these individuals had efficiency ratings of 78.59% and 140.96% respectively, which were
far in excess of Complainant’s 13% rating. The Agency therefore concluded that Complainant
failed to prove his allegations of discrimination.

This appeal followed.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Through his attorney, Complainant challenges the Agency’s finding of no discrimination. We
shall discuss Complainant’s specific contentions, infra.

The Agency opposes the appeal and requests that the Commission affirm its final decision. We
shall also discuss the specifics of the Agency’s contentions, infra.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                6                                     2020004816

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Preliminary Matters

On appeal, Complainant contends that the Agency violated 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) when it
“failed to fully investigate the portion of [Complainant’s] allegations” concerning his February
2019, opposition to his Supervisory ISO’s discriminatory actions and did not collect appropriate
testimony and data regarding the extent to which management retaliated against him for
requesting reasonable accommodation. He argues that the Commission should issue default
judgment against the Agency for its failure to fully investigate the complaint, or, in the
alternative, remand the complaint for a supplemental investigation. The Agency counters by
noting that Complainant had numerous opportunities to address these concerns, including when
he received the ROI and at the hearing stage. The Agency maintains that he squandered the
opportunity to engage in full discovery by failing to comply with the AJ’s orders and ultimately
withdrew his request for a hearing.

Sanctions serve a dual purpose. On the one hand, they aim to deter the underlying conduct of the
non-complying party and prevent similar misconduct in the future. Barbour v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 07A30133 (June 16, 2005). On the other hand, they are corrective and
provide equitable remedies to the opposing party. Given these dual purposes, sanctions must be
tailored to each situation by applying the least severe sanction necessary to respond to a party's
failure to show good cause for its actions and to equitably remedy the opposing party. Royal v.
Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009). Several factors are
considered in “tailoring” a sanction and determining if a particular sanction is warranted: 1) the
extent and nature of the non-compliance, and the justification presented by the non-complying
party; 2) the prejudicial effect of the non-compliance on the opposing party; 3) the consequences
resulting from the delay in justice; and 4) the effect on the integrity of the EEO process. Gray v.
Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 07A50030 (Mar. 1, 2007).

Having reviewed the record, we are disinclined to issue default judgment against the Agency or
remand the complaint for any alleged deficiencies in the record, as we fail to see how the Agency
failed to investigate Complainant’s February 2019 opposition activity. In this regard, we note
that the ROI contains an email from Complainant’s Section Chief, memorializing her
conversation with Complainant on February 7, 2019. ROI at 000497. In that email,
Complainant’s Section Chief noted that she encouraged Complainant to talk with his Supervisory
ISO regarding his concern that he was being treated differently than other ISOs. Id. In response,
Complainant stated that he would follow his Section Chief’s advice and discuss his concerns
with his Supervisory ISO. Id. While we are mindful that Complainant asserts that his
Supervisory ISO subsequently took a series of retaliatory actions against him as reflected in
claims 1-3, for the reasons discussed below, we find that the Agency had legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for the alleged actions.
                                                7                                    2020004816

As for Complainant’s contention that the Agency violated 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) when it did
not collect appropriate testimony and data regarding the extent to which management retaliated
against him for requesting reasonable accommodation, we are unable to determine how the
Agency failed to collect appropriate testimony and data, as Complainant did not articulate the
nature of the Agency’s failings. We note that the hearing stage is a continuation of the EEO fact-
finding process. See Mario H. v. Dep’t of Commerce, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150189 (Oct. 14,
2016). We ultimately agree with the Agency that Complainant squandered his opportunity to
develop the record due to his noncompliance with the AJ’s orders. As such, we find that the
record is adequately developed. We turn now to the merits of the complaint.

Disparate Treatment - Claims 1 and 3

For Complainant to prevail on his claims of disparate treatment, he must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a
prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411
U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Complainant must ultimately prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
agency’s explanation is pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc.,
530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Burdine,
450 U.S. at 256.

Assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we find
that the Agency has articulated legitimate reasons for its actions. With regard to the progress
review, our review of the record shows that the Supervisory ISO gave Complainant a negative
performance rating on January 29, 2019, because Complainant had efficiency ratings under 10%
for the month of December and had multiple errors in administrative and timekeeping tasks. ROI
at 00823-24. Concerning, the letter of counseling dated January 30, 2019, our review of the letter
shows that the Supervisory ISO issued the letter because of Complainant’s failure to follow the
Supervisory ISO repeated instruction to not work past 6:00 p.m. without prior supervisory
approval. Id. at 000718.

As for removal action, we note that the Deputy Director asserted that she removed Complainant
from federal service because Complainant exhibited poor performance in the area of technical
proficiency, which affected his ability to provide timely and accurate decisions to customers.
ROI at 000618-21. In this regard, the Deputy Director maintained that Complainant’s work
contained numerous errors and that he was not “able to follow rules, regulations, and standard
operating procedures regarding immigration law.” Id. at 000515-16.
                                                8                                    2020004816

Furthermore, the Deputy Director asserted that her decision to remove Complainant was also
based, in part, on his failure to follow management’s instructions to not work past 6:00 p.m.
without supervisory approval. Id.

Complainant disputes the Agency’s articulated reasons. In arguing pretext, Complainant initially
notes that the Supervisory ISO gave him an “Achieves Expectations” rating for the period
between June 25, 2018 to September 30, 2018. Complainant notes that he subsequently attended
the Agency’s basic training program from October 2018 through late November 2018. He
maintains that prior to leaving for basic training, there was a glitch in the computer system that
caused all new hires to be locked out. Complainant asserts that around December 2018, shortly
after he returned from basic training, his Supervisory ISO zeroed out those hours for all of his
employees, including one of his male colleagues (C2), so that they would not be adversely
affected by the glitch. Complainant asserts that his Supervisory ISO’s failure to “zero out” his
hours adversely affected his efficiency ratings because he was charged hours that he could not
work.

Complainant also maintains that his Supervisory ISO, in rating him negatively on the progress
review, relied on statistics that should not have been counted because he was in training for
much of the rating period. Additionally, Complainant asserts that the Agency, in deciding
whether to remove him, omitted his efficiency ratings for February and March 2019, when he
finally attained certification. He further asserts that the Agency made the decision to remove him
without considering the December 19, 2018, email from his mentor noting his overall
improvement. As for his alleged errors in administrative and timekeeping tasks, Complainant
asserts that there is only one counseling memorandum in the record regarding Complainant
staying past 6:00 p.m. He states that he only stayed late only a handful of times because his
Supervisory ISO assigned him work near the end of the day and asked him to complete the file
before he left. Lastly, Complainant maintains that the comparator information that the Agency
provided shows that C2’s high efficiency rating was based on C2’s post-certification
performance, whereas his numbers were based on the period when he had not yet been certified.

Having reviewed the record, we find no persuasive evidence that the Agency acted with
discriminatory motive. With regard to the negative performance review, while we acknowledge
Complainant’s contention that the reason for his low efficiency rates was due to his Supervisory
ISO’s failure to “zero out” his statistics during the system, we find that his Supervisory ISO had
a nondiscriminatory reason for not doing so. In this regard, we noted that his Supervisory ISO
averred during EEO investigation that he did not zero out Complainant because Complainant
was still in training status and working closely with his mentor to achieve certification. ROI at
000451. Moreover, as reflected in the record, the systems that Complainant could not access
were unrelated to his case completion functions, and therefore had minimal, if any, impact on
Complainant’s productivity. In reaching this conclusion, we are mindful that Complainant named
at least one individual who allegedly had his numbers zeroed out by his Supervisory ISO.
However, we do not find Complainant’s comparator to be similarly situated to Complainant
because the record shows that the named individual had already completed training and was not
in a similar training status as Complainant. Id. at 000450.
                                                9                                     2020004816

Given that Complainant’s mentor corroborated his Supervisory ISO’s negative assessment of
Complainant’s work, we conclude that Complainant has not persuasively shown that his
Supervisory ISO issued him a negative progress review based on discriminatory animus. Id. at
000570.

As for the letter of counseling, we are also disinclined to find in favor of Complainant on this
issue. By Complainant’s own admission, he worked outside the regular working hours despite
his Supervisory ISO’s repeated instruction for him to stop. See Complainant’s Appellate Brief at
22. We find no evidence that Complainant’s Supervisory ISO engaged in discrimination by
admonishing Complainant for failing to comply with his instruction to work only during core
Agency hours.

Finally, we turn to Complainant’s removal. As discussed above, the Deputy Director removed
Complainant because of her concerns about Complainant’s technical proficiency. While we
understand that Complainant vehemently disagrees with the decision to remove him from federal
service, we cannot say that the removal action was discriminatory in light of the Deputy
Director’s legitimate concerns about Complainant’s performance. We note that both the
Supervisory ISO and the mentor shared the Deputy Director’s concerns. ROI at 000570 and
000823-24. In so finding, we are mindful that the Probationary Review Board did not consider
Complainant’s February and March efficiency reports in determining whether to retain
Complainant; however, the record reflects that these reports had not yet been generated. We note
that agencies have broad discretion to remove probationary employees. As we find no evidence
of discriminatory motive, we decline to second guess the Agency’s assessment of Complainant’s
performance.

In reaching this conclusion, we considered Complainant’s reference to individuals whom he
alleged had sub-70% efficiency ratings like him but were not removed. Having reviewed the
record, we agree with the Agency that these comparators were not similarly situated to
Complainant because the record persuasively fails to show that these comparators had the same
performance deficiencies as Complainant. See ROI at 000541 (noting that neither individual had
ratings below the minimum cumulative expected efficiency). For these reasons, we conclude that
Complainant cannot prevail on his claims of disparate treatment.

Claim 2 – Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

Under the Commission’s regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o)
and (p). To establish that the Agency denied Complainant a reasonable accommodation,
Complainant must show that: (1) he was an individual with a disability; (2) he was a qualified
individual with a disability; and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation.
See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under
the Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation),
No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002).
                                               10                                   2020004816

Assuming arguendo that Complainant was a qualified individual with a disability, we find no
evidence that he was ever denied reasonable accommodation. Our review of the record shows in
October 2018, Complainant sought a reasonable accommodation for test-taking. That request
was granted in full. Though Complainant alleges on appeal that he subsequently asked his
Supervisory ISO and his mentor for additional accommodations, to include relocation away from
copier and noise cancellation headphones, we find no evidence that Complainant ever requested
these accommodations. Indeed, we note that both Complainant’s Supervisory ISO and
Complainant’s mentor denied being aware of these requests. See ROI at 000458 and 000566-67.
Because Complainant cannot persuasively establish that he requested the additional claimed
accommodations, we are unable to conclude that he was ever denied a reasonable
accommodation.

Hostile Work Environment – Claims 1-3

To establish a claim of harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). The
harasser’s conduct should be evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in
the victim’s circumstances. Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC
Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently
severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant’s] employment and create an abusive
working environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993); see also Oncale
v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc., 23 U.S. 75 (1998).

As an initial matter, we find that a finding of harassment is precluded on Complainant’s claims
of discrimination relating to the negative performance review, counseling letter, denial of
reasonable accommodation, and removal action, given our determination that Complainant failed
to establish that the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by discriminatory animus. See
Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01932923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

With regard to Complainant’s allegation that NS1 harassed him by making racist and
homophobic comments, we find that Complainant cannot show that he was ever subjected to
racist and/or homophobic remarks by NS1 or anyone else. Complainant bears the burden of
proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged discriminatory acts occurred. While
we acknowledge that Complainant vehemently asserts on appeal that the alleged incidents
occurred, the record reflects NS1 has denied the allegations. See ROI at 000445-49. Because
Complainant withdrew his request for a hearing, we do not have the benefit of an AJ’s credibility
determinations of the witnesses in the case.
                                                  11                                2020004816

Based on our review of the record evidence, we conclude that Complainant cannot meet his
burden because the evidence is at best equipoise. See Lore v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120113283 (Sept. 13, 2013) (complainant failed to establish that witnesses made
false statements where he withdrew his request for a hearing and credibility determinations were
unable to be made); Brand v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120102187 (Aug. 23, 2012)
(complainant failed to establish that his coworker made offensive comments in a “he said, she
said” situation where complainant requested a final decision and an Administrative Judge did not
make credibility determinations).

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                12                                    2020004816

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations

October 12, 2021
Date
