             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Bart L., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Merrick B. Garland,
                                       Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                                  (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                            Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020002489

                                 Agency No. BOP-2018-0163

                                          DECISION

On February 14, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from
the Agency’s January 14, 2020 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final order.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the Agency subjected Complainant to discrimination and
harassment based on his race and protected EEO activity.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Correctional
Treatment Specialist at the Agency’s facility in Lexington, Kentucky.

On November 15, 2017, Complainant contacted the EEO Counselor following a situation with
his first-line supervisor, the Unit Manager (S1, Caucasian, no prior EEO activity). When the
matter was not resolved informally, Complainant filed a formal complaint, on February 21, 2018,


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2020002489

alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work
environment on the bases of race (African American) and in reprisal for protected EEO activity
in the instant complaint, when: S1 allegedly yelled at him on November 15, 2017; increased
Complainant’s assignment of duties; threatened Complainant with disciplinary action; denied
Complainant’s leave request following the initial EEO contact regarding the instant matter; and
gave Complainant negative evaluations beginning in December 2017.

The Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. The investigative record reflects the
following pertinent matters relating to the subject claim. Complainant’s second level supervisor
was the Associate Warden (S2, Caucasian, no prior EEO activity) and his third level supervisor
is the Warden (S3, Hispanic, engaged in prior EEO activity).

On November 13, 2017, Complainant asserted that he was provided with an altered caseload
which led to an increase of his duties. Complainant argued that S1 never increased the workload
or treated non-African American employees the same way. S1 denied increasing or changing
Complainant’s caseload, or any other employees’ caseload, during the relevant time period.

On November 15, 2017, S1 copied Complainant on an email regarding an inmate who was
previously part of Complainant’s caseload. S1 stated that because transfer paperwork needed to
be completed, Complainant was asked to do the paperwork as the inmate was previously on his
caseload. S1 noted that this is standard practice. Instead of accepting the request, S1 stated that
Complainant responded to the email in an unprofessional and inappropriate manner. S1 called
and requested that Complainant meet in his office where S1 verbally counseled Complainant on
his response. S1 stated that he did not yell at or threaten disciplinary action. S1 stated that there
were no further actions beyond a verbal counseling.

Complainant alleged that he was not involved in the matter with the inmate and asserted that
when he asked S1 why he was included. Complainant stated that S1 became sarcastic,
combative, and yelled at him. Complainant asserted that shortly after the call, he was called into
S1’s office, where S1 continued to berate and threaten Complainant with disciplinary action.
Complainant submitted two memoranda to S2 regarding the matter. S2 met with Complainant
regarding the incident and determined that S1’s action was appropriate, per standard practice,
when S1 requested that Complainant complete transfer paperwork for an inmate that was
previously in Complainant’s caseload.

Complainant requested to take annual leave between February 4 and 10, 2018, but stated that the
request was denied. Complainant asserted that the denial was because he contacted the EEO
Counselor in the instant matter. Complainant stated that he was scheduled to provide weekend
coverage and was informed that he could only take weekend days off if another employee agreed
to switch schedules with him. Complainant did not detail if he attempted to find substitute
coverage. S1 stated that he did not deny Complainant’s leave based on his race or EEO activity.
S1 asserted that any denial would have been based on operational needs.
                                                 3                                     2020002489

Starting December 1, 2017, Complainant asserted that he also received negative performance log
entries, and evaluations, which all occurred after he began the EEO process. Complainant noted
that he received a Satisfactory evaluation for the quarter ending on March 31, 2018. Complainant
noted that S1 has provided him with ratings of Minimally Satisfactory and Satisfactory for the
last four years. S1 asserted that Complainant has received Satisfactory, Excellent, and
Outstanding ratings for different elements for different rating periods through the years, and that
he was most recently provided with an overall Satisfactory rating. S1 denied making evaluations
based on Complainant’s race or protected EEO activity. S1 asserted that evaluations are based
solely on performance. S1 noted that performance issues resulted in Satisfactory rating, such as
untimely completion of program reviews; not following through on program review policy; and,
better management of caseload.

On December 1, 2017, Complainant sent S3 an email accusing S1 of harassment. In the email,
Complainant asserted that S1 had been continually bullying and harassing him since November
15, 2017. After receiving the email, S3 requested a workplace violence committee to review the
allegations. The committee conducted a threat assessment on December 7, 2017 and found that
there was no threat to Complainant’s safety or the potential for workplace violence.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). When the Agency did not hear back, it issued a final Agency
decision on January 14, 2020, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency determined that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination or retaliation as
alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant, through counsel, asserts that he had timely filed for a hearing, but did
not hear back until he was provided with the final Agency decision (FAD) on January 14, 2020.
Complainant asserts that a FAD was, therefore, inappropriate to issue. Assuming the FAD was
appropriately issued, Complainant argues that it is arbitrary and capricious, failing to address his
claims, and was self-serving to the Agency. Complainant requests that the FAD be set aside and
that his complaint be remanded for a hearing.

The Agency did not provide an appellate response.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
                                                4                                    2020002489

statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As a preliminary matter, we note that on appeal, Complainant asserted that he had previously
timely requested for a hearing before an EEOC AJ. However, there is no record of such request
in the record. Moreover, Complainant did not provide any documentation demonstrating that he
had timely filed for a hearing request. Therefore, we discern no reason to remand the matter for a
hearing. Furthermore, we find that the Agency acted appropriately in issuing the FAD. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

Disparate Treatment

For Complainant to prevail on his claim of disparate treatment, he must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof
of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas,
411 U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Complainant must ultimately prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency’s explanation is pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products,
Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993);
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of race and reprisal, the
Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. For example, S1
detailed that Complainant’s caseload was not increased based on one request, and that he was
only verbally counselled on November 15, 2017, based on his response to a managerial request.
Specifically, Complainant believed that he was not responsible for completing transfer
paperwork for an inmate previously in his caseload. Complainant argued that S1’s reasoning was
flawed as the inmate would have been the responsibility of another case manager during that
time period.
                                                 5                                      2020002489

Here, both S1 and S2 noted that it was standard practice to ask an employee to complete transfer
paperwork for an inmate who is no longer within their caseload if the inmate previously was.
Complainant and S1 clearly disagreed on this practice, which led to S1 verbally counseling
Complainant on November 15, 2017. However, there is no evidence that S1 requested
Complainant to complete this task and the subsequent verbal counselling were based on his
protected class or in reprisal.

Regarding the other portions of his claim, such as his allegation that his assignment of duties was
increased, this assertion was not supported evidence in the record. Nor was there evidence that
Complainant’s caseload was any larger and/or more challenging than his peers. S2 noted another
employee who carried a larger load than Complainant, and that it was common for employees to
have a caseload up to 200 inmates, while Complainant’s caseload was below this range.
Regarding Complainant’s leave request, Complainant acknowledged that he was scheduled to
work weekend hours and that he was informed he could take the time off if he found someone
willing to fulfill his shift. Management did not deny his ability to take the leave but asserted that
he could take leave if he found a replacement. This policy was to ensure proper staffing for
operational needs. Regarding Complainant’s evaluations, there is nothing in the record to
demonstrate that S1’s evaluations were based on anything other than performance matters.
Complainant was given a quarterly rating of Satisfactory and aside from a general assertion that
the rating was negative, provided no detailed information as to how the rating was based on his
race or in reprisal.

We note that as the employer, the Agency has broad discretion to determine how best to manage
its operations and may make decisions, including personnel decisions, on any basis except a
basis that is unlawful under the discrimination statutes. See Furnco Construction Corp. v.
Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978); Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
An employer is entitled to make its own business judgments. The reasonableness of the
employer's decision may, of course, be probative of whether it is pretext. Therefore, our analysis
focuses on the Agency's motivation, not its business judgment. Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d
1003, 1012 n.6 (1st Cir. 1979). In other words, it is not the function of this Commission to
substitute its judgment for that of management officials who are familiar with the needs of their
facility, and who are in a better position to make decisions, unless other facts suggest that
proscribed considerations of bias entered the decision-making process. See Shapiro v. Soc. Sec.
Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996), citing Bauer v. Bailar, 647 F.2d 1037,
1048 (10th Cir. 1981). Based on the record, we find that the Agency has provided legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions and Complainant failed to demonstrate that the
Agency’s reasons were pretext for discrimination or retaliation.

Hostile Work Environment

Complainant also alleged that he was subjected to unlawful harassment. A harassment claim is
examined under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21
(1993). See also Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems. Inc., EEOC Notice No.
915.002 (Mar. 8, 1994). To establish this claim, a complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to
                                               6                                    2020002489

a statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome
conduct; (3) the harassment complained of was based on his statutorily protected class; (4) the
harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability.

We note that with regard to retaliatory harassment, Complainant only needs to show that such
actions are the type of action that would dissuade a reasonable employee from making or
supporting a charge of discrimination. See Burlington Northern & Santa Fe Railroad. Co. v.
White, 548 U. S. 53 (2006); see also EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related
Issues, No. 915.004 (Aug. 25, 2016); Carroll v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Request No.
05970939 (Apr. 4, 2000).

Complainant alleged that he was subjected to retaliatory harassment based on his EEO activity
and race. Complainant’s assertion, as a member of a protected class who has engaged in EEO
activity, was that he subjected to unwelcome and hostile actions by management. However, after
careful consideration, we conclude Complainant has not established that the actions forming his
harassment claim occurred because of his race or protected EEO activity. Moreover, a finding of
a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that Complainant failed to
establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by discriminatory or
retaliatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21,
2000).

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding of no discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration.
                                                  7                                   2020002489

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs.
                                                  8                                     2020002489

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request
the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court
costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has
the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time
limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 9, 2021
Date
