               U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                             Office of Federal Operations
                                    P.O. Box 77960
                               Washington, DC 20013


                                       Sally E. Boarman, 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Andrew M. Saul,
                                         Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2021001879

                                     Appeal No. 2020004147

                                  Agency No. HQ-19-0695-SSA

                     DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020004147 (December 31, 2020).
EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant worked as a Program Expert at the Agency’s facility in Baltimore, Maryland. She
filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination on the bases of race (White), sex (female),
disability, age (75) and reprisal when: (1) on March 14, 2019, Complainant was reprimanded;
and (2) on March 14, 2019, Complainant was removed from the “Steigerwald” Project (defined
by the Agency as a high priority litigation support project for ongoing litigation whose work was
time sensitive with little or no margin for error).

Complainant did not request a hearing. The Agency dismissed claim 1 for failure to state a claim,
stating that no reprimand was issued. Based on the evidence developed during the investigation
into claim 2, the Agency concluded no discrimination was established.



1
    Complainant has requested that a pseudonym not be used.
                                                 2                                      2021001879

Our prior appellate decision affirmed the Agency’s final decision that affirmed the dismissal of
claim 1 and concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination as alleged as to claim 2.

In her request for reconsideration, Complainant expresses her disagreement with the previous
decision, and reiterates some of her arguments made on appeal. She also submits two witness
statements that were made in 2014. We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a
second appeal to the Commission. See EEO MD-110, Ch. 9, § VII.A. Rather, a reconsideration
request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices,
or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not done so here. With regard to the witness
statements, Complainant has not established that she could not have submitted them during her
original appeal.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020004147 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  3                                     2021001879

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 26, 2021
Date
