             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                       Thomasina B.,1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                     Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                         Secretary,
                                   Department of Defense
                                 (Defense Logistics Agency),
                                          Agency.

                                  Request No. 2021002395

                                   Appeal No. 0120141298

                                 Agency No. DLAR-12-0064

                   DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

On March 11, 2021, the Agency timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 0120141298
(February 9, 2021). 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c). Complainant, who is not represented, opposes the
Agency’s request. For the reason that follow, the Agency’s request is GRANTED in part and
DENIED in part, and the previous decision is MODIFIED accordingly.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by the Agency as
an Inventory Management Specialist, GS-2010-09, Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) Aviation,
Commodities Material Management Branch, Fuel Accessories Material Management Unit, at
Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

Complainant filed an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging, in relevant part,
that she was discriminated against based on her sex (sexual orientation) when she was harassed
from July 2010 to July 2012.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                     2021002395

After the Agency conducted an EEO investigation, Complainant elected an immediate final
decision from the Agency rather than request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge.
Thereafter, the Agency determined that the EEO investigation was inadequate and conducted a
supplemental investigation. Complainant again elected to have the Agency issue a final decision
rather than request a hearing.

In its January 2014 final decision, the Agency found that while Title VII2 prohibits sex
stereotyping discrimination, Complainant failed to prove that such had occurred. Complainant
appealed.

The previous decision noted that in Bostock v. Clayton County, 590 U.S. ___, 140 S.Ct. 1731
(2020), the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual orientation and transgender
status is prohibited by Title VII. It partly reversed the Agency’s decision, finding Complainant
was harassed based on her sexual orientation from July 2010 to July 2012, and that the Agency
was liable for the harassment.

The finding of discrimination was based on the evidence of record, as summarized here:

Complainant started working for DLA in June 2006 and was promoted from the warehouse to
her Inventory Management Specialist position in February 2010. The primary function of her
new job was obtaining parts for Air Force maintenance shops, an apparently complex endeavor.
When Complainant started in February 2010, she was assigned to service three Air Force
maintenance shops. At least two were in Building 3001, one with a female Air Force shop
manager (CW1). They became friends and, by July 2010, were in a romantic relationship which
ended in May 2012.

Around July 2010, Complainant’s ex-husband, who was also employed at the base, began
spreading rumors at the facility that Complainant was gay and dating CW1. The evidence shows
these rumors spread across the facility, and soon most coworkers and management officials were
aware of Complainant’s sexual orientation and relationship with CW1.

One of Complainant’s coworkers (CW2) (heterosexual female) engaged in an ongoing campaign
of verbally harassing Complainant with anti-gay remarks, saying she was going to hell and her
kids would grow up gay, haranguing her about her sexuality and insisting she was harming her
children, and saying homosexuality was an abomination in the eyes of God and she would pray
for her because she was gay.

Around August 2011, Complainant reported CW2’s harassment to a supervisor (S5).
Complainant requested that they be separated and that CW2 be the one to be moved. S5 asked
CW2 if she wanted to be moved, and she declined. S5 took no further action. After Complainant
notified S5, the harassment continued, and CW2 proceeded to interfere with Complainant’s
work.


2
    Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.
                                               3                                    2021002395

Complainant also told her acting second-level supervisor (S6) about CW2’s offensive remarks
about Complainant’s sexual orientation. S6 held a meeting with the entire unit regarding what
behaviors were acceptable and unacceptable, but there is no evidence in the record that he spoke
with CW2 directly. Complainant stated the harassment did not stop until she and CW2, without
the help of management, were able to work out their differences and agreed to work together.

Management officials also began taking action against Complainant because of her relationship
with CW1. When Complainant’s first-line supervisor (S1), second-line supervisor (S2), and the
head of the Commodities Material Management Branch (S3) heard the rumors about
Complainant and CW1, Complainant alleges they made “a big issue” out of the rumored
relationship. For example, S1 walked into CW1’s office where Complainant was going over a
parts listing with CW1. S1 told Complainant to leave, and when she showed him the work they
were doing, he told her to go to his office when she was done. When Complainant went to his
office, S1 reprimanded Complainant for spending too much time in CW1’s shop and not enough
time at her desk.

In addition, in July 2010, Complainant requested a temporary change for a later start time for
child-care reasons. At first the request was denied. However, later management conditioned its
approval of the request on Complainant moving from CW1’s building to another building.
Management cited safety reasons for the condition, stating they did want Complainant to work
alone during the last hour of her new schedule. However, as noted on our previous decision, a
male coworker (Comparison 1) was granted a later start time to ride with his wife to work but
was not similarly required to relocate from the building. Moreover, at a later date, Complainant
was again granted a temporary request to work an hour later, but this time there was no similar
concern for her safety.

In early 2011, Complainant was reassigned back to CW1’s building based on her seniority.
However, she was not allowed to service CW1’s shop. CW1’s flight chief felt service
deteriorated after Complainant left and asked her then-supervisor (S4) if Complainant could
return to servicing the shop, but S4 replied, “It’s not going to happen.” By April 2011,
management again moved Complainant to another building. S4 noted that she, S2, and S3 made
the ultimate decision to do this because they were jointly concerned that Complainant was
socializing with CW1. Complainant was sent an email asserting there was no business-related
reason for her to be in Building 3001 (CW1’s building).

In June 2011, Complainant and another senior co-worker agreed to divide up the workload,
leaving Complainant to work in the shop where CW1 worked. S5 did not approve and assigned
CW1’s shop to a new, less-experienced coworker (CW3). When CW3 was struggling to perform
his duties and asked Complainant to help him, Complainant was told by S5 to leave the building
and received a reprimand for providing assistance. CW3 stated in the record that he really needed
Complainant’s assistance because of his inexperience, but she was prohibited by supervisors
from helping him.
                                                 4                                     2021002395

Our previous appellate decision concluded that the cumulative effect of these incidents resulted
in creating a hostile work environment for Complainant based on her sexual orientation in
violation of Title VII.

In its request for reconsideration, Agency counsel argues, with citations to the record, that the
previous decision should be reversed because its factual and legal conclusions were clearly
erroneous. Complainant argues the previous decision should be upheld.

                                           ANALYSIS

EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R.       § 1614.405(c).3

Preliminary Matter – Consideration of Agency’s Brief

The Agency argues that the previous appellate decision did not consider its brief in opposition to
Complainant’s appeal. It submits a declaration by a retired EEO Specialist stating that on May
19, 2014, he filed a legal brief with EEOC prepared by Agency counsel opposing Complainant’s
appeal. It also submits a copy of the brief. While the declaration does not state the method of
filing, we presume from the copy of the brief now provided that it was mailed to EEOC.4 There
is no evidence, however, that this brief was received by EEOC and it was not in the appellate file
for Appeal No. 0120141298 when the previous decision was written, and hence was not
considered.

The Agency, in its request for reconsideration, has provided us with a copy of that brief. In
reviewing this case, we now will consider the entire record, including the Agency’s May 2014
opposition brief.




3
  In its request for reconsideration, the Agency argues for the first time that Complainant’s
complaint should be dismissed because she failed to timely initiate EEO counseling. We note
that the Agency’s own final decision did not dismiss the complaint for this reason nor did the
Agency raise this matter on appeal. As such, we find the Agency has waived this argument and
we will not address it further in this decision.
4
  Even if it had been submitted by facsimile, our normal business practice was to document this
in a log. EEOC’s relevant facsimile log contains no entry indicating this brief was received.
                                                5                                    2021002395

Harassment

A hostile work environment claim is comprised of a series of separate acts that collectively
constitute one unlawful employment practice. National Railroad Passenger Corporation v.
Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 117 (2002). Unlike a claim which is based on discrete acts of
discrimination, a hostile work environment claim is based upon the cumulative effect of
individual acts that may not themselves be actionable. Id. at 115.

To establish a claim of harassment, a complainant must show that: (1) they belong to a statutorily
protected class; (2) they were subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on
their statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment
and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or
creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for
imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).
Further, the incidents collectively must have been "sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the
conditions of [complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment." Harris
v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

It is uncontested that Complainant belongs to a class or group (sex – female; sexual orientation –
gay) protected by Title VII. The Supreme Court has ruled it is impossible to discriminate against
a person for being gay or transgender without discriminating based on sex as being gay or
transgender are inextricably bound up with sex. Bostock v. Clayton County, 590 U.S. ___,140
S.Ct. 1731, 1741 - 1742 (2020).

       Harassment by Coworker (CW2)

Based on the evidence of record, our prior appellate decision concluded CW2 subjected
Complainant to ongoing verbal harassment about her sexual orientation that amounted to a
violation of Title VII. The Agency itself found in its FAD that CW2 repeatedly subjected
Complainant to anti-gay remarks which created a hostile work environment. This finding is
supported by the statements of Complainant and multiple witnesses. Moreover, the evidence
shows that Complainant reported CW2’s conduct to management officials but little action was
taken to address the matter.

On request for reconsideration, Agency counsel argues that, even assuming CW2 subjected
Complainant to a hostile work environment, it is undisputed that it only lasted to October 2011,
not July 2012, and that the finding in our prior decision to the contrary therefore was clearly
erroneous. In support of its argument that CW2 ceased making harassing comments to
Complainant by October 2011, the Agency points to Complainant’s affidavit that by late October
2011 she and CW2 had resolved their issues with one another. We add that their supervisor at the
time (S7) stated that when he came to the unit Complainant and CW2 were getting along. In her
opposition to the Agency request for reconsideration, Complainant does not dispute that CW2
ceased harassing her in October 2011.
                                                6                                   2021002395

Based on the above, we amend the finding in our previous decision to conclude that CW2 did not
continue to discriminatorily harass Complainant beyond late October 2011.

       Harassment by Management

The incidents at issue regarding actions by management officials are:

   1. In 2010, S1 told Complainant while she was working in CW1’s shop office that she was
      there too long, and later verbally counseling her for spending too much time in the shops
      she served rather than at her desk.

   2. In July 2010, S3 required her to move away from Building 3001, where CW1’s shop was
      located.

   3. In early 2011, after returning to Building 3001, management stopped her from resuming
      service to CW1’s shop despite the request of the Flight Chief that Complainant be
      assigned to the shop.

   4. By email on April 21, 2011, S4 instructed Complainant to move to Building 2210 with
      the admonition that she need not come to Building 3001 (CW1’s building) for any work-
      related reason.

   5. Around June 2011, S5 denied Complainant permission to assist CW3 with his two shops,
      one of which was CW1’s, and some months later counseled Complainant for doing so.

The Agency now argues that the record does not show incidents 1 and 5 were based on
Complainant’s sexual orientation because no evidence shows they were connected to separating
her from CW1.

Regarding incident 1, we note that in his investigatory declaration, S1 stated, in the context of
relating that Complainant was a very good friend of CW1, that he “wrote [Complainant] up” for
spending too much time in CW1’s shop. The Agency also argues that there is no evidence that
when S1 verbally counseled Complainant he knew of her sexual orientation. S1 started
supervising Complainant in July 2010 and stated that after a few months he figured out that she
was gay. Given this, we infer S1 knew Complainant was gay when he counseled her in the
winter of 2010.

Regarding incident 5, CW3 stated that after being hired in June 2011, he physically worked in an
office with three other inventory management specialists – CW2, Complainant, and CW5 (who
joined them in July 2011), and he was assigned two shops - CW1’s and Shop 2. CW1 stated she
had the largest shop in Flight, and suggested it had the highest number of orders. Complaint file
at Adobe PDF 258, S/ROI Ex. B-21, Bates No. 224. CW3 stated that, of the people he worked
with, the only experienced inventory management specialists were CW2 and Complainant, and
that CW2 was unavailable to help him because she was working with CW5.
                                                7                                    2021002395

After writing that Complainant and CW1 were in a relationship, CW3 related that as a new
employee he needed the assistance of an experienced inventory management specialist, but he
witnessed management officials tell Complainant not to help him. Complaint file at Adobe PDF
204, S/ROI Ex. B-15, Bates No. 170. Complainant gave a similar account, except she stated that
she asked S5 if she could help CW3 but S5 said no, and that some months later when she tried to
help CW3 with one of his shops, S5 verbally reprimanded her. On reconsideration, the Agency
argues that there is no evidence or even an allegation that Complainant tried to help CW3 with
CW1’s shop as opposed to Shop 2, that CW3 physically worked in CW1’s shop, or that when
Complainant tried to help CW3 she traveled to CW1’s shop to do so. It also argues that
Complainant’s position description states the incumbent “may occasionally” work on the shop
floor.

Regarding incident 5, the previous decision found that, but for the concern about CW1, there was
no reasonable explanation for why S5 would not let Complainant help CW3 given that he was
inexperienced and struggling with his two shops. One of these shops was headed by CW1, who
stated she had the largest shop in the Flight and suggested it had the highest number of orders.
We find the inference in the previous decision that S5 was motivated by wanting to keep
Complainant away from CW1 is not clearly erroneous as not allowing Complainant to help CW3
with his two shops would work to separate her from CW1’s shop. In his first investigatory
declaration, S5 stated that he was not aware of Complainant’s sexual orientation, but in his
second stated Complainant was not shy about her sexual orientation and he learned about it after
he began supervising the unit, and knew CW1 and Complainant were in a relationship. S5
initially hiding his awareness of Complainant’s sexual orientation casts doubt on the probative
value of his testimony.

Based the foregoing considerations, we find that the conclusion in the previous decision that
incidents 1 and 5 were based on Complainant’s sexual orientation was not clearly erroneous.

On reconsideration regarding incident 3, the Agency argues that the decision-maker did not
know Complainant was gay or which shops she previously served when she assigned
Complainant her shops upon her return to the building in early 2011. However, the evidence
supports the previous decision’s finding that S4 was involved in the decision not to resume
Complainant’s service there. It was around this time that CW1’s flight chief told S4 that service
to their shop deteriorated after Complainant no longer served it and asked if she could resume, to
which S4 replied, “It’s not going to happen.” S4 gave a similar account of this exchange.
Complaint file at Adobe PDF 238, S/ROI, Ex. B-19, at 6, Bates No. 204. Regarding S4’s
motivation, the Agency argues that S4 stated Complainant spent too much time away from her
desk and not in her work area visiting other locations such as shops – not that she was visiting
CW1’s shop. We disagree. Regarding the March 2011 assignment decision, we find S4
specifically referred to CW1’s shop, and at a minimum indicated S3 agreed not to allow
Complainant to resume service to CW1’s shop. Complaint file at Adobe PDF 237, S/ROI, Ex. B-
19, at 5, Bates No. 203.
                                                8                                    2021002395

On incident 2, for the reasons already outlined herein, we find the previous decision’s finding
that S3’s reason for relocating Complainant in July 2010, was pretext to mask sexual orientation
discrimination was not clearly erroneous.

On reconsideration, the Agency argues that management’s actions are better analyzed as a
separate set of claims apart from Complainant being verbally harassed by CW2. While we agree
the actions of managers and CW2 are not necessarily tied together, the record reflects that all
involved were aware of Complainant’s sexual orientation and her being in a relationship with
CW1. Incidents 1 – 5 are united by the same theme; management taking actions to stop
Complainant, based on her sexual orientation, from going to CW1’s shop to keep them apart.
Moreover, we note that the same management failed to take appropriate action to stop CW2’s
harassment of Complainant because of her relationship with CW1. We find that taken together,
the alleged incidents constitute a hostile work environment in violation of Title VII.

To the extent management explained that it took actions because Complainant spent excessive
time in CW1’s shop which adversely impacted Complainant’s work, the previous decision did
not credit this explanation because there was nothing in the record showing that Complainant
ever acted unprofessionally or that her presence in CW1’s shop affected her ability to do her job.
The previous decision observed that Complainant’s performance ratings were nothing other than
Fully Successful. We add that Fully Successful was highest rating possible. Further,
Complainant earned a sustained superior performance award that stated her work was
outstanding for 2011. The previous decision recounted that CW1’s flight chief requested that
Complainant resume servicing their shop because of her outstanding service. We add that CW1
stated she believed Complainant’s in-person interaction with her mechanics was important
because they were not necessarily articulate in explaining what they needed, and this saved them
time. The previous decision found that other employees who were not gay socialized during
work and were not counseled or relocated for this reason.

On the finding in the previous decision regarding incident 2 – that management conditioned the
granting of Complainant’s hardship request for a later start time on her moving out of the
building housing CW1’s shop (3001) – the Agency argues on request that there is no evidence
Complainant worked in Building 3001 then, making this finding clearly erroneous. We disagree.
After S2 initially denied Complainant’s hardship request for a later start time by email on July
20, 2010, Complainant forwarded S2’s disapproval to S3, who overruled S2. In the forward,
Complainant’s signature line included Building 3001. Complaint file, at Adobe PDF p. 507, ROI
Ex. F-13, at Bates No. 211.

S3 stated he overruled S2’s denial because while at that point S2 had no one working with an
altered schedule, some employees in other areas under his supervision as head of the
Commodities Material Management Branch did. S3 stated he and S2 conditioned granting
Complainant an altered schedule on her relocating so she would not work alone for safety
reasons. Complaint file, at Adobe PDF pp. 97, 100, 244 - 245, S/ROI Ex. B-4 at Bates Nos. 64,
66 & Ex. B-20, at 4-5, Bates Nos. 210 – 211. Complainant relocated in July 2010.
                                                9                                    2021002395

Complainant stated that during this time period Comparison 1 (male, married to a woman)
performed the same duties as her. She noted that they both were granted a one hour later start
time but, unlike her, he was permitted to work alone the last hour of his revised shift. The
Agency argues that Complainant was not similarly situated to Comparison 1 because his
schedule adjustment was granted before S2 became his supervisor, and S2 stated that
Comparison 1 and Complainant did not do the same job. It argues that the previous decision’s
finding of pretext was clearly erroneous because it relied on Comparison 1 being similarly
situated to Complainant, but he was not because the decision regarding him was made at a
different time by a different supervisor (not S2). But the record reflects that S3 was involved in
both decisions and played a leading role in requiring Complainant to relocate. Also, we find that
that the previous decision did not solely rely on Comparison 1 in finding pretext on the July 2010
matter. The previous decision noted that in May 2011, unlike in July 2010, management granted
Complainant’s subsequent request to adjust her schedule without requiring her not to work alone.
At the time, Complainant was not located in Building 3001. Complainant stated that S3 allowed
her to work unsupervised for the last hour of this revised shift so long as she sent an email when
she left every day.

The previous decision found that in early 2011, based on her seniority Complainant was
reassigned to the building where CW1’s shop was located, but in March 2011, to separate them,
she was moved to another building. The Agency argues the previous decision got these moves
backwards. We agree. The record reflects that effective January 18, 2011, S4 moved
Complainant from Building 3001 to Building 2210, referred to as the CSD shop. Complaint file
at Adobe PDF 103, S/ROI Ex. B-4, at Bates No. 69. Both S4 and Complainant state this occurred
due to her lack of seniority. Complaint file at Adobe PDF 123, 237, S/ROI Ex. B-6 at 8, B-19 at
5, Bates No. 89, 203. Complainant stated that by email on March 2, 2011, S4 notified her she
was being returned to her original work area, and then or shortly thereafter assigned her two
shops, only one of which she originally had; Shop 2, not CW1’s shop.5 Complaint file at Adobe
PDF 123, S/ROI Ex. B-6 at 8, Bates No. 89.

The Agency also accurately recounts that in her investigatory declaration Complainant stated she
was “verbally reprimanded” by S1 and S5. It argues that being verbally counseled is not a
tangible employment action. We agree, but find it has no impact on the outcome of our decision.
Complainant counters S1 stated he, “wrote her up” for being away from her desk.



5
  Later, on April 20, 2011, S4 emailed Complainant that she wanted her to move to the SSC and
advised she would not need to come to Building 3001 for any work-related reason. Complaint
file at Adobe PDF 104, S/ROI Ex. B-4, at Bates No. 70. SSC refers to the Shop Service Center
which is located in Building 2210. Complaint file at Adobe PDF 384, ROI Ex. F-3, at Bates No.
88. By June 2011, S4 moved Complainant to Building 3907 (new Fuel Building) because she
wanted all her subordinates in the same location. In June 2011, Complainant worked there with
coworkers CW2 and CW3, and in July 2011, CW5 joined them. The record suggests CW4 may
have also been there from June – August 2011.
                                                10                                     2021002395

But the record contains no written reprimands or rebukes to her by S1 (or by S5), and
Complainant does not contend she received any.

The Agency argues that there is no evidence S1 and S5’s reproaches to Complainant about
spending too much time away from her desk specifically regarded her visiting CW1’s shop. In
the context of stating that managers made a big issue of her working with CW1, Complainant
stated that S1 verbally reprimanded her in the winter of 2010 for spending too much time in
shops, and not enough at her desk. Complaint file Adobe PDF 120, S/ROI Ex. B-6 at 5, Bates
No. 86. While Complainant stated she served Shop 2 and CW1’s shop before being moved by S1
from Building 3001 to Building 2210 in January 2011, S4 related that Complainant served only
CW1’s shop. Complaint file at Adobe PDF 237, S/ROI Ex. B-19 at 5, Bates No. 203. CW1
stated that on one occasion when Complainant was in her shop going over a parts listing with
her, S1 came by and told Complainant that she was there too long. While there is no written
reprimand in the record, in his affidavit S1 stated, in the context of relating that Complainant was
a “very good friend of CW1”, that he “wrote [Complainant] up” for spending excessive time
away from her desk. Complaint file at Adobe PDF 162, S/ROI Ex. B-10 at 4, Bates No. 128.

In sum, we conclude that even accepting some of the Agency’s minor factual modifications, our
previous decision correctly determined that the cumulative effect of the events established by the
evidence resulted in a hostile work environment for Complainant based on her sexual orientation.

Imputing Liability to Agency

Once a hostile work environment is found, we must be determined whether the Agency should
be held liable for its existence. An employer is subject to vicarious liability for unlawful
harassment if the harassment was “created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively
higher) authority over the employee.” Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful
Harassment by Supervisors, OLC Control Number EEOC-CVG-1999-2 (Jun. 18, 1999)
(available at eeoc.gov). An employer is always liable for harassment by a supervisor on a
prohibited basis that culminates in a tangible employment action. No affirmative defense is
available in such cases. Id.

On request, the Agency argues that the previous decision’s liability finding under this standard
was clearly erroneous because of the harassing actions taken by the supervisors were not
tangible. Where the harassment by a supervisor creates an unlawful hostile environment but
does not result in a tangible employment action, the employer can raise an affirmative defense to
liability, which it must prove by a preponderance of the evidence. The defense consists of two
elements: (a) the employer exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any
harassment; and (b) the employee unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventative or
corrective opportunities provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise. For larger
employers, reasonable care generally requires establishing, disseminating, and enforcing an anti-
harassment policy and complaint procedure and to take other reasonable steps to prevent and
correct harassment, but a lack of a formal policy and complaint procedure will not defeat the
affirmative defense if the employer exercised sufficient care through other means. Id.
                                                11                                    2021002395

On request, the Agency argues that it met its affirmative defense. Regarding element (a), the
Agency argues that anti-harassment training was given to Complainant’s organization in August
2009 and December 2011. The EEO investigator requested information on EEO/harassment
training conducted in Complainant’s organization. The Agency replied, “Harassment Training
was conducted August 3 – 6, 2009” “Refresher 12/2011.” Complainant joined the Commodities
Material Management Branch after the first training. The EEO investigator asked for specific
information on the training, including the list of attendees. However, no more information on the
training was provided by the Agency. The Agency argues that EEO complaint rights (including
for harassment) were posted on the organization bulletin’s boards during at least 2011 and 2012.
The distribution list for the posters includes DLA Aviation at Oklahoma City. But there is no
affidavit, declaration or other information verifying the posters were posted on bulletin boards in
any areas Complainant worked or would take breaks and were viewable. We find that the
Agency did not meet element (a) of its affirmative defense. Accordingly, we need not address
element b.

When the harassment is perpetrated by a co-worker, liability is imputed to the employer if it
knew or should have known of the misconduct and failed to take immediate and appropriate
corrective action. What is appropriate will necessarily depend on the facts of the particular case,
the severity, and persistence of the harassment, and the effectiveness of any remedial step. Id. On
reconsideration, the Agency argues S5 stated that around August 2011, Complainant told him
CW2 was creating a hostile work environment and she could not get along with CW2, but
Complainant never told him CW2 was harassing her because of her sexual orientation.
Complainant stated that on several occasions she told S5 that CW2 harassed her and made
comments about gays and how she was going to hell and her kids would grow up gay. Complaint
file at Adobe PDF 491, ROI Ex. F-13 at 7, Bates No. 195. The Agency argues that to the extent
there is a credibility dispute between Complainant and S5, it was improper for the previous
decision to the resolve it in Complainant’s favor because there was no independent information
in the record Complainant’s version was more credible. Complainant counters that she
complained to S5 on several occasions about CW2’s harassment and homophobic remarks
directed to her, and as found in the previous decision, her supervisors were aware as early as
August 2011.

The Agency has not shown that the previous decision resolving the dispute between Complainant
and S5 was clearly erroneous. First, as recounted above, S5 lost some credibility by changing his
story about not knowing and then knowing Complainant’s sexual orientation. Further, it is
uncontested that before S6 left the Commodities Material Management Branch in August 2011,
Complainant told him CW2 made offensive remarks to her about her sexual orientation.
Complaint file Adobe PDF 181, 183, S/ROI Ex. B-12, Bates Nos. 147, 149. This makes it more
likely than not that Complainant also told S5, and shows, in any event, that by August 2011, she
had notified management of this. The finding in the previous decision that the corrective actions
management took were insufficient to avoid Agency liability was not clearly erroneous.
                                               12                                   2021002395

Agency’s Objection to Training Order

The Agency asserts that DLA employs around 1,100 people at Tinker Air Force Base, of which
about 458 are in DLA Aviation and 599 in DLA Distribution. In 2011, DLA Aviation’s Base
Commodities Material Management Branch had 46 employees. The Agency argues that there is
no evidence that the rumors spread beyond DLA Aviation’s Commodities Material Management
Branch of 46 staff, and that Complainant did not allege that it did. In reply, Complainant
reiterates the findings in the previous decision but points to no evidence contradicting the
Agency. None of people identified in the record who heard or allegedly heard the information
conveyed in the rumors were outside the Commodities Material Management Branch, and all but
one worked in Complainant’s unit or were in her management chain. The Agency argues that the
previous decision’s finding that the rumors spread throughout its workforce at Tinker Air Force
Base, meaning 1,100 people, was clearly erroneous and led to the sweeping order that all its base
staff receive 8 hours of live training. We agree and, as such, the ordered training requirement
below is narrowed.

                                        CONCLUSION

After reconsidering the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
agency's request meets the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to grant the request, in part. The decision of the Commission in Appeal No.
0120141298 is MODIFIED. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on a Request to Reconsider.

                                            ORDER

   1. The Agency will immediately take steps to ensure that all harassment ceases and desists
      within DLA Aviation’s Commodities Material Management Branch at Tinker Air Force
      Base. The Agency will ensure that it takes steps to immediately address any reports of
      harassment or discrimination brought to its attention.

   2. The Agency shall undertake a supplemental investigation to determine Complainant’s
      entitlement to compensatory damages under Title VII. Within 10 calendar days of the
      date of this decision, the Agency shall provide Complainant a point of contact to submit
      evidence of compensatory damages, give her guidance on what to provide consistent with
      Carle v. Department of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993) and/or
      EEOC’s Enforcement Guidance: Compensatory and Punitive Damages Available under
      Sec 102 of the CRA of 1991, OLC Control No. EEOC-CVG-1992-3 (Jul. 14, 1992), and
      advise her she has 80 days from the date of this decision to submit the evidence to the
      Agency point of contact. The Agency shall issue a FAD addressing compensatory
      damages within 60 calendar days of the date it receives Complainant’s damages
      submission, with appeal rights to this office. The Agency shall submit a copy of the FAD
      to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth below.
                                                13                                     2021002395

   3. Within 120 days of the date on which this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide all
      management and employees at DLA Aviation’s Commodities Material Management
      Branch at Tinker Air Force Base Workplace Civility and Bystander Intervention training
      with an added component on employees’ rights and managements’ responsibilities under
      Title VII in a matter DLA’s EEO function deems appropriate.

   4. The Agency shall consider taking disciplinary action against the responsible management
      officials listed in this decision and CW2. The Agency shall report its decision within 30
      days of the date this decision is issued. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action,
      it shall identify the actions taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, it
      shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline. The Commission
      does not consider training to constitute disciplinary action.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its DLA Aviation’s Commodities Material Management Branch
at Tinker Air Force Base copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed
by the Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and
electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued,
and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places
where notices to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to
ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original
signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled
"Implementation of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the
posting period. The report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal
Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting
documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket
number under which compliance was being monitored.
                                                 14                                     2021002395

Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report
in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s
final report must contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the
Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (Q0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the
dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and
not the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will
terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 15                                     2021002395

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 9, 2021
Date
