              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Yolanda S., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Andrew M. Saul,
                                         Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                            Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2020002457

                      Hearing Nos. 560-2019-00083X & 560-2019-00125X

                     Agency Nos. DAL-18-0288-SSA & DAL-18-066-SSA

                                            DECISION

On January 29, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 20, 2019 final decision (FAD) concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

Complainant began working at the Agency in March 2008. In October 2013, Complainant began
working as a Claims Specialist, GS-11, in the Agency’s Austin, Texas Field Office (AFO).

A Claims Specialist determines initial and continuing eligibility for social security benefits based
on a claimant’s submissions and Agency policy. A Claims Specialist generally gathers
information through in-person or phone interviews with claimants. In November 2016,
Complainant transferred to the Agency’s Tulsa, Oklahoma District Office (TDO) as a Claims
Specialist.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020002457

On March 18, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the basis of disability (narcolepsy without cataplexy) when, on December 21,
2017, she learned management recommended the denial of her continued reasonable
accommodation request. The Agency docketed the March 18 complaint as Agency No. DAL-18-
0228-SSA.

On June 4, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the basis of disability (narcolepsy without cataplexy and chronic headaches) when,
since March 2018, it failed to provide reasonable accommodation when it denied Complainant’s
request to continue an approved accommodation allowing liberal leave, afterhours telework, and
reduced client interviewing. The Agency docketed the June 4 complaint as Agency No. DAL-18-
0660-SSA.

The Agency accepted Complainant’s complaints for EEO investigation.

During the EEO investigations, Complainant stated she was diagnosed with Narcolepsy in early
2016 and “Narcolepsy makes sleeping, caring for oneself, learning, concentrating, thinking,
communicating, and working more difficult than before because of constant fatigue.” Further,
Complainant stated that she seems to get sick more often than prior to her diagnosis and that the
medications cause side effects. Complainant stated that she is not able to work eight hours per
day/five days per week and has difficulty listening to claimants while querying their records and
asking them questions and doing so in the allotted timeframe. Complainant stated, in AFO, she
had a primarily paper workload rather than interviewing claimants; did a half-day per week for
walk-in claimants; and was not charged as absent without leave (AWOL) when she arrived late
for work as long as she called in by 11:00 a.m. and that her late arrival only happened like twice
per week. Complainant stated, when she transferred to TDO, she asked management to not
charge her as AWOL when she was unable to call in by 8:45 a.m. and arrived late, to not
schedule her for interviews or screening prior to 11:00 a.m., and to allow her to go to her desk
and work in a quiet environment when she has severe headaches. Complainant stated, with the
aforementioned accommodations, she would be able to perform the essential functions of her
position, avoid disciplinary action, and ensure proper claimant coverage.

The TDO Assistant District Manager (S1) stated, when Complainant transferred to TDO, she had
an informal reasonable accommodation in place, which the office maintained for “quite some
time.” S1 stated that management realized that Complainant’s narcoleptic symptoms were not
temporary (as Complainant initially suggested an adjustment period) and engaged in the
reasonable accommodation process. It determined that Complainant could not perform the
essential functions of her position as an essential function of a Claims Specialist was to interact
with the public to gain information to process claims. S1 stated that Complainant’s attendance
deteriorated a great deal and she worked perhaps three hours per day, which was a hardship to
the office. S1 noted that field office daily work hours ended nationally at 5:30 p.m. so there
would be no supervision for Complainant if she worked 5:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. S1 stated that the
Agency sought a new position for Complainant under the reassignment process, but she declined
the GS-5 Claims Assistant position because it was a lower grade and required relocation.
                                                 3                                   2020002457

The Agency stated, as of September 2018, Complainant requested reassignment again and it was
searching for positions.

In pertinent part, the investigative record contains the documents that follow.

   •   Request for Reasonable Accommodation, dated April 18, 2016, to AFO
       management, asking for “adjustment in assigned duties from taking appointments
       and being assigned walk-in duty to a paper . . . or internet based workload.”
   •   Reasonable Accommodation Request Decision letter, dated April 27, 2016, from
       AFO management, stating the requested accommodation was denied because it
       would exclude Complainant from “client interaction,” which is an essential
       function of the job. However, management agreed, between May 3, 2016 to the
       end of June 2016, to provide temporary duty modification of assigning medical
       continuation disability reviews and including Complainant in the walk-in rotation.
   •   Reasonable Accommodation Request, dated November 10, 2016, to TDO
       management. Complainant requested that management not charge her as AWOL
       when she is late to work and does not call in before 8:45 a.m., not schedule her for
       interviews or screenings before 11:00 a.m., and allow her the ability to go back to
       her desk to work if she has a severe headache.
   •   Reasonable Accommodation Request Decision Letter, dated March 15, 2017,
       from TDO management. The letter stated that it provided a temporary
       modification of assigning Complainant only continuous disability reviews and
       including Complainant in the walk-in rotation. The Agency stated that it could no
       longer provide this temporary duty modification or exclusion from appointments
       prior to 11:00 a.m. The Agency stated that it granted Complainant a liberal leave
       policy when she reported to work late and if she contacted the office prior to the
       end of the morning flexible work band.
   •   Request for Reasonable Accommodation, dated November 27, 2017, to TDO
       management, requesting liberal leave in the morning, the ability to work
       compensatory time until 6:00 p.m. when teleworking, and no more than one day
       per week interviewing via phone or walk-in clients through front-end
       interviewing.
   •   Review of Reasonable Accommodation Request, dated December 17, 2017,
       stating that liberal leave has been in place since February 2017 and it is not
       assisting Complainant with late arrivals (she arrives late three to five times per
       week) or performing the essential functions of her position; local management
       cannot approve working beyond business hours (5:30 p.m.) when teleworking;
       and Complainant’s request removes the essential functions of her position in
       interviewing clients to determine benefit eligibility. The Agency stated that
       Complainant’s late arrivals have an adverse impact on the Agency and its ability
       to conduct business.
   •   Reasonable Accommodation Decision dated March 20, 2018, stating that
       Complainant has not been arriving to the office before 1:00 p.m. daily and it
       cannot authorize indefinite liberal leave (annual leave or leave without pay)
                                                4                                   2020002457

       usage. The Agency stated that it would authorize liberal leave for another six
       months to see if Complainant’s medical team can assist her with improvements.
       The Agency stated that if there are no improvements, it will continue to work with
       Complainant to locate an effective accommodation, including potential
       reassignment. The Agency stated there was no nexus between Complainant’s
       disability and her request to work until 6:00 p.m. on telework days or to limit
       interviewing to one day per week. The Agency stated that the requested
       accommodations are an undue hardship and lower performance standards.
   •   An email dated September 6, 2018 from Complainant to S1 stating that she cannot
       accept a Claims Clerk, GS-5 position and cannot relocate out of the commuting
       area at the time. She stated that she would consider positions that paid closer to
       her GS-11 salary even if not a Claims Specialist position.

At the conclusion of the EEO investigations, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of
the reports of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but subsequently withdrew
her request. Consequently, the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The FAD concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination as alleged. The FAD found that the Agency took reasonable steps to engage and
then accommodate Complainant and the requested accommodations posed an undue hardship to
the Agency. The FAD found that the requested accommodations were tried for extended periods
and were found to be ineffective. The FAD stated that Complainant’s daily absences from the
office impacted her ability to perform her customer-service oriented position and the Agency’s
ability to fulfill its mission. The FAD found that the Agency sought to work with Complainant to
find a reassignment position and did so, but Complainant declined the position.

The instant appeal from Complainant followed.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                 5                                      2020002457

Under the Commission's regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o)
and (p).

After receiving a request for reasonable accommodation, the employer should engage in an
informal process with the disabled individual to clarify what the individual needs and identify the
appropriate reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation), EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (October 17, 2002); see
also, Abeijon v. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120080156 (Aug. 8, 2012).
Protected individuals are entitled to reasonable accommodation, but they are not necessarily
entitled to their accommodation of choice. Castaneda v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No.
01931005 (February 17, 1994).

Assuming, without finding, that Complainant is an individual with a disability within the
meaning of the Rehabilitation Act, we find that Complainant has not shown that the Agency
failed to provide her reasonable accommodation. Complainant is an Agency Claims Specialist,
working with claimants to initiate and continue social security benefits. Generally, the Claims
Specialist position interviews claimants in-person or over-the-phone on an appointment or walk-
in basis. Complainant stated, in early 2016, she was diagnosed with Narcolepsy and it “makes
sleeping, caring for oneself, learning, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working more
difficult than before because of constant fatigue.” Complainant stated that she is not able to work
eight hours per day/five days per week and has difficulty listening to claimants while
interviewing them (querying their records and asking them questions) and doing so in an allotted
timeframe. Complainant initially worked in the Agency’s Austin Office, AFO, where she states
she had a primarily paper workload rather than having to interview claimants, she did a half-day
per week for walk-in claimants, and she was not charged as AWOL when she arrived late for
work as long as she called in by 11:00 a.m. Complainant stated, in November 2016, she
transferred to the Tulsa Office, TDO. Complainant stated, due to her Narcolepsy, she asked TDO
management to not charge her as AWOL when she was unable to call in by 8:45 a.m. and arrived
late, to not schedule her for interviews or screenings prior to 11:00 a.m., and to allow her to go to
her desk and work in a quiet environment when she has severe headaches. Complainant asserted,
with the aforementioned accommodations, she would be able to perform the essential functions
of her position, avoid disciplinary action, and ensure proper claimant coverage.

The Agency stated, when Complainant transferred to TDO in 2016, she had an informal
reasonable accommodation in place from AFO, which the office maintained for “quite some
time.” Management stated, once the narcoleptic symptoms appeared permanent following a
medical treatment adjustment period, it engaged in the reasonable accommodation process with
Complainant. The record shows the Agency provided modification of duties to include less client
interaction and a liberal leave policy (use of annual leave and leave without pay) for
Complainant’s absences and late arrivals.
                                                6                                     2020002457

The Agency stated, ultimately it determined that Complainant could not perform the essential
functions of her position - to interact with the public to gain information to process claims - as
her attendance deteriorated immensely and she only worked about three to four hours per day.
The Agency stated that Complainant’s time away was an undue hardship due to the customer
service nature of its office and it could not offer indefinite liberal leave. Further, the Agency
stated there was no nexus between Complainant’s disability and her request to work until 6:00
p.m. on telework days (when nationally, field offices closed at 5:30 p.m.) or to limit interviewing
to one day per week. The Agency stated that the accommodations Complainant requested were
ineffective so it sought reassignment for Complainant and offered her a GS-5 Claims Assistant
position, which she declined. Complainant stated that she declined the position because she
needed wages equivalent to her GS-11 salary and could not relocate from the commuting area at
that time. Complainant, however, did not identify another vacant funded position to which she
could be reassigned. The investigative record shows that the Agency continued to work with
Complainant between 2016 and at least until late 2018, which is the time of the instant
complaints, to find accommodation for her medical condition.

Based on the circumstances herein, we find that the Agency did not discriminate against
Complainant based on disability when, between November 2016 and September 2018, it
provided duty modifications, liberal leave, and, when these accommodations proved ineffective,
offered Complainant reassignment to a GS-5 Claims Assistant position. We find that the Agency
fulfilled its obligation under the Rehabilitation Act. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on
Reasonable Accommodation.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final agency decision finding no discrimination.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration.
                                                7                                     2020002457

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission.
                                                 8                                      2020002457

The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not
alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right
to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 9, 2021
Date
