              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                           Nick S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Thomas W. Harker,
                                       Acting Secretary,
                                    Department of the Navy,
                                           Agency.

                                    Request No. 2021000840

                                    Appeal No. 2020001102

                               Agency No. DON-18-42158-00836

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020001102 (October 6, 2020). EEOC
regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to reconsider any
previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting
party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a Painter Work Leader, WL-4102-09, assigned
to the Paint Department at the Norfolk Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth, Virginia.

On October 25, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging harassment and
discrimination by the Agency based on race (African-American), age (over 40), and in reprisal for
prior EEO activity when on October 25, 2018, he received a pre-action investigation for refusing
work removing paint from the USS McKee.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                   2                                      2021000840

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative
Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final agency decision. Based on the evidence developed
during the investigation into the complaint, the Agency issued a final decision finding that
Complainant was not disparately treated and was not subjected to unlawful harassment.

In our prior appellate decision, we affirmed the Agency’s determination that Complainant failed
to prove his discrimination and harassment claims. In his request for reconsideration of that
decision, Complainant essentially repeats the same arguments made and considered during his
original appeal. We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the
Commission. See EEO MD-110, Ch. 9, § VII.A. Rather, a reconsideration request is an
opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation
of material fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of
the Agency. Complainant has not done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the request
fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the Commission to
deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020001102 remains the Commission's
decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on
this request.

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United
States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision.
If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the
official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  3                                     2021000840

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 11, 2021
Date
