             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Doloris W., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                       Xavier Becerra,
                                          Secretary,
                           Department of Health and Human Services
                                   (Indian Health Service),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020000573

                               Agency No. HHS-IHS-0369-2018

                                          DECISION

On October 28, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
September 23, 2019 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Nurse Specialist -
Trauma Coordinator, GS-11, at the Agency’s Chinle Comprehensive Health Care facility in
Chinle, Arizona. 2

On October 9, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging, between May 2018 and
August 2018, the Agency subjected her to disparate treatment and hostile work environment



1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  The record reveals, January 2008 to 2016, Complainant worked at the Agency as a Registered
Nurse and, on July 24, 2017, returned from retirement to occupy the Nurse Specialist - Trauma
Coordinator position. As of November 11, 2018, Complainant works as a Staff Nurse at the
Agency’s Chinle facility.
                                                 2                                     2020000573

harassment on the basis of reprisal for prior protected EEO activity (claims of mistreatment to
management and the instant complaint) when:

       1.      the Emergency Department Medical Director (S1) sent Complainant 49
               emails over a four-day period questioning her truth and honesty,
       2.      on several occasions, S1 told Complainant to quit,
       3.      S1 was condescending to Complainant, blamed her for problems, and
               berated her in front of others,
       4.      Complainant had to perform duties outside of her position description,
       5.      on July 24, 2018, management withheld Complainant’s retention bonus,
       6.      she followed the chain-of-command, but upper management failed to
               address Complainant’s concerns, and
       7.      management denied Complainant’s request to withdraw her resignation for
               August 31, 2018.

The Agency accepted Complainant’s complaint for EEO investigation.

During the investigation, for (1), Complainant stated that S1 questioned her extensively
regarding attendance at training, rather than seeking clarification. Complainant stated that she
attended approved training that she needed for her position, and S1’s questioning was
“demeaning and harassing.” She noted that S1 attended the same training. Complainant stated
that she notified the Medical Clinic Director (S2) who told her “[S1] is very difficult to talk to.”
As to (2), Complainant stated that S1 suggested she quit if she did not trust him and if she could
not meet a deadline for a project. For (3), Complainant stated that S1 berated her in front of
others regarding training hours and stated that he would audit her timesheet. Complainant stated
that S1 performed an audit on timesheets and emailed everyone regarding his questions about her
timesheet. Regarding (4), Complainant stated that S1 wanted her to work on committees, in the
Nursing Emergency Room, and assisting with Nursing certifications and hospital-related
education. Complainant stated that she had to ask S1 if he wanted her to focus on trauma-related
matters or the workload outside of trauma.

With regard to (5), Complainant stated that she had a history of working more than nine years
with the Agency and one year in the position she encumbered so she should have gotten a
retention bonus. Complainant stated that S1 did not inform her that her bonus was contingent on
obtaining Level 4 Trauma designation. Complainant stated that S1 is very hostile toward her. For
(6), Complainant stated that upper management did not address her concerns with S1. As to (7),
Complainant stated, in July 2018, she, S1, and S2 met and S2 stated there was irreparable harm
in the relationship between S1 and Complainant. S2 asked Complainant to resign and stated that
he would assist her in finding another position. Complainant stated that she agreed to resign, but
then wanted to withdraw her resignation so that she could have legal recourse and just in case
another position was not located for her. Human Resources worked with Complainant to get a
GS-10 Staff Nurse position, which is a lower grade and pay than her Trauma Coordinator
position.
                                                  3                                     2020000573

For (1), Complainant’s immediate supervisor, S1, stated that he did not send Complainant
harassing emails but sent her emails about her core work hours and completion of duties. S1
stated that staff expressed concern about Complainant not being present when she should and not
completing work. Further, S1 stated that he inquired about several trainings he did not approve.
With regard to (2), S1 denied ever telling Complainant to quit. As to (3), S1 stated that he asked
Complainant to attend training and seminars directly applicable to her position duties. He stated
that he inadvertently “replied all” to Complainant in an email chain and he apologized to her.
Also, he stated he publicly and professionally informed Complainant to stop calling him
derogatory names to colleagues as it was a disruption to the workplace and would not be
tolerated. For (4), S1 stated that he did not ask Complainant to perform duties outside of her
position description and her decision to do so negatively impacted her ability to focus on trauma-
related duties. He stated that the facility needed to have its trauma credentialing, but it did not
receive it because Complainant submitted subpar and incomplete documentation. S1 stated that
his purpose was to ensure that the facility received proper credentialing so that it could provide
trauma services. Regarding (5), S1 stated that Complainant did not receive the retention bonus
because she neglected to submit required documentation for trauma designation for the facility,
so they were unable to perform certain services and significant resources were wasted. With
regard to (6), S1 stated that Complainant is the one who treats others with disrespect and
hostility. He stated that Complainant calls him obscene names and complains about the
workplace to others, which impacts morale. For (7), S1 stated that Complainant was not a good
fit for the Trauma Coordinator position, and she was unhappy in the position, so management
offered to find her a Staff Nurse position, which is what she was interested in. S1 stated that her
moving to another position opened the position to other candidates.

The Clinical Director, S2, stated that he does not recall stating that S1 was difficult to talk to and
he investigated Complainant’s concern about emails and found an email chain between S1 and
Complainant regarding performance and attendance matters. S2 stated that Complainant was
unsuccessful in attaining Trauma Certification for the facility, which was a large part of her
official duties. Further, he stated that he investigated Complainant’s concerns and was not aware
of harassment or disparate treatment by S1. S2 stated that a retention bonus is discretionary to a
supervisor and based on performance and retention in a position. (Complainant did not remain in
the Trauma Coordinator position.) S2 stated, during an August 2018 meeting, Complainant
indicated she was not interested in continuing work on the Trauma Certification application and
tendered her resignation. S2 stated that he offered to find Complainant a clinical nursing position
and extended her resignation date several times until she could be selected for a staff nursing
position (S1 is no longer Complainant’s supervisor). S2 stated that the Trauma Coordinator
position description was reclassified and made into two positions with additional duties for each,
and Human Resources recruited for the positions.

In pertinent part, the investigative record contains the following documents.

       ° An email dated May 29, 2018 from S1 to Complainant, apologizing for replying
       to group regarding her time and attendance.
                                                4                                     2020000573

       ° Letter dated June 26, 2018 from Arizona Department of Health Services to
       Agency’s Health System Administrator denying renewal of Trauma Certification.

       ° Letter from Complainant resigning from her Trauma Coordinator position
       effective August 31, 2018 and requesting to move to another position at an
       Agency facility.

       ° Email communications between Complainant and S1.

At the conclusion of the EEO investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal from
Complainant followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, she
must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas Department of
Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail, Complainant
must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's explanation is a pretext for
discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St.
Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).
                                                5                                     2020000573

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Here, we find, assuming arguendo, Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination
based on reprisal, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
For (1), the Agency stated that Complainant’s first-level supervisor, S1, communicated with
Complainant about her core work hours, completion of duties, attending training without his
approval and other performance matters. As to (2), S1 denied ever telling Complainant to quit.
Regarding (3), the Agency stated that it asked Complainant to attend training and seminars
directly applicable to her position duties, and S1 inadvertently “replied all” to Complainant in an
email chain, for which he apologized to her. For (4), the Agency stated that Complainant was not
asked to perform duties outside of her position description and her choosing to do so negatively
impacted her ability to focus on her trauma-related duties. The Agency noted that Complainant’s
focus should have been obtaining the facility’s trauma credentialing, which it did not receive
because Complainant submitted subpar and incomplete documentation. Regarding (5), the
Agency stated that Complainant did not receive the retention bonus because she neglected to
submit required documentation for trauma certification for the facility, so they were unable to
perform certain services and significant resources were wasted. As to (6), S1 stated that
Complainant is hostile and disrespectful and he had to tell her to stop calling him obscene names
and complaining about the workplace to other employees, such that it impacted morale. S2 stated
that he investigated Complainant’s concerns regarding S1 and found neither disparate treatment
nor harassment. Regarding (7), the Agency stated that Complainant did not perform the trauma-
certification duties and was unhappy in her position and working for S1, so management offered
to find her a clinical nurse position. The Agency extended Complainant’s resignation several
times so that Human Resources could assist her in getting an appropriate position. Effective
November 11, 2018, Complainant began a Staff Nurse position at the Chinle facility. We find
that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s actions were based on discriminatory motives.

Harassment

To establish a claim of hostile environment harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) she
belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of
unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on her statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or
condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
                                               6                                    2020000573

(5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d
897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also,
Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (March 8,
1994).

Here, we find that Complainant failed to establish discriminatory harassment. Specifically, we
find that Complainant failed to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the actions
complained of were based on reprisal. Even if we consider, individually and in total, the
incidents occurred as alleged, we conclude that a finding of harassment is precluded by our
determination that Complainant failed to establish that the Agency’s actions were motivated by
discriminatory animus. See Harris, supra.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final agency decision finding no discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507.
                                                7                                     2020000573

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed
timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing
period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  8                                     2020000573

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 7, 2021
Date
