             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Salvatore K., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Merrick Garland,
                                       Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                                    (U.S. Marshals Service),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 0120182095

                                 Hearing No. 570-2014-00184X

                                Agency Nos. USM-2013-00379
                                           USM-2015-01457


                                           DECISION

Complainant timely filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s May 11, 2018, final
order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission REVERSES the
Agency’s final order.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are whether the EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) properly issued a decision
without a hearing, and whether the AJ properly found that Complainant did not prove that he was
improperly subjected to medical inquiries and examinations.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                      0120182095

                                        BACKGROUND

The United States Marshals Service (Agency) is statutorily responsible for security in federal
courthouses. 28 U.S.C. § 566(a). The Agency fulfills this responsibility by contracting with
private companies to provide Court Security Officers (CSOs) for federal courthouses.

Complainant began working as a CSO in 2001. From 2012 until June 12, 2014, Complainant
worked as a CSO pursuant to a contract between the Agency and federal contractor ABC Security,
Inc. (ABC). 2 In this position, Complainant provided security to the federal court and its judicial
officers, witnesses, defendants, and attorneys. According to the CSO position description, the
duties and responsibilities of a CSO require frequent and prolonged walking, standing, running,
sitting, and stooping. Report of Investigation (ROI), p. 93. Additionally, a CSO is sometimes
required to subdue violent or potentially violent people. Id. Complainant usually worked at fixed
posts near judges’ chambers or at the entrance of the courthouse, where he screened members of
the public seeking entry to court. At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, ABC assigned
Complainant as a CSO in the Agency’s Court Security Program at the federal courthouse in
Greenbelt, Maryland.

Under the terms of the contract between ABC and the Agency, each CSO “shall undergo and pass
an annual examination during the life of ABC the contract for qualification purposes.” ROI,
Exhibit 17, p. 4. As part of this annual process, all CSOs and CSO applicants complete a
comprehensive medical form (CSO Form 229) entitled “Certification of Medical Examination for
Court Security Officers,” and undergo a medical examination by a contractor-designated
examining physician. In this case, a Federal Occupational Health (FOH) physician served as the
examining physician.

According to the contract between the Agency and ABC, if an FOH physician is unable to make a
medical determination or it is necessary to clarify or prove that a disqualifying condition has been
corrected or eliminated, the FOH physician will issue a ‘deferred’ determination and request
additional information from the Contractor. Additionally, according to the contract, “the
Contractor shall require CSOs to submit specific supplemental information within 60 days, unless
otherwise specified by FOH or the Agency, for completion of a specific test, in order to medically
qualify.” The contract states that if the requested information is not received by the Agency’s
Occupational Health Nurse within the 60-day timeframe, or as required for the completion of a
specific test, the individual must be disqualified to perform under the contract.

In or about 2005, Complainant was diagnosed with Borderline Type II Diabetes. On August 1,
2013, Complainant was examined by an ABC approved physician pursuant to the annual CSO
exam. After the exam, a physician (Dr1) initially reported that Complainant was medically
qualified for his CSO position. The report was then transmitted to the Agency.



2
 Pseudonym used for federal contractor since private sector complaint filed. See 42 U.S.C. §
2000e–5(b).
                                              3                                   0120182095

On October 27, 2013, a FOH physician (Dr2) reviewed the report and issued a medical review
form (MRF) to Complainant. The MRF stated that “because there is a diagnosis of diabetes,”
Complainant must have his treating physician provide a detailed report regarding “diabetes
control” and his current medical status. ROI, Exhibit 11, pp. 1, 2. Additionally, Dr2 requested
that Complainant provide the following information:

       1. One month of glucose values performed at least four times per day, before breakfast as
          well as one to two hours after meals, and stored in a downloadable Glucometer;

       2. Testing measuring Complainant’s cardiovascular, neurological, renal, and ocular
          health, including a Bruce protocol treadmill stress test;

       3. Complainant’s current hemoglobin measures;

       4. The number of hypoglycemic events in the previous year, and the number of such
          events that required assistance from others;

       5. A copy of all laboratory results taken over the previous year and current hemoglobin
          A1C;

       6. A copy of all outpatient clinic notes taken over the previous year;

       7. The date of onset/diagnosis, history of Ketoacidosis, hospitalizations, and general
          statement of Complainant’s compliance with diabetic education, prescribed
          medications, dietary recommendations, and activity recommendations over the past
          year. Also, information regarding whether there is hypoglycemia awareness, and if
          there is, a description of the symptoms experienced and at what blood glucose level
          symptoms occur;

       8. Orthostatic blood pressure measurements while in the supine position and three minutes
          after Complainant stands up;

       9. Complainant’s current eye examination by an ophthalmologist documenting the
          presence or absence of eye disease based on specific testing (including diabetic
          retinopathy, macular edema, hemorrhages, lenticular opacities, etc.) which evaluates
          red/green and blue/yellow color vision; and

       10. Complainant’s history of all medications, including type and dosage adjustments over
           the past year.

On January 8, 2014, Dr1 provided a letter in response to the MRF. In the letter, Dr1 stated the
following:
                                               4                                     0120182095

       On physical exam, [Complainant] has diet controlled Type II Diabetes Mellitus.
       He has had no symptoms of Diabetes. Recently, he was seen by his
       ophthalmologist, [Dr3], as well as his cardiologist, [Dr4], both of whom performed
       thorough evaluations and found no evidence of diabetic eye or cardiac disorders.
       He is not in need of blood sugar testing on a daily basis, and there is no need for
       medications at this point. He has been strongly urged to continue an aggressive
       weight loss and exercise regimen to improve his blood sugar findings. He will be
       rechecked for hemoglobin A1c today and again in three months following the above
       noted exercise and diet regimen. He does not require medication at this time and
       his borderline Type II Diabetes should not impair his ability to perform his job.

Dr2 subsequently issued a follow-up medical review (MRF) in which she again deferred making
a medical determination, pending further examination. ROI, Exhibit 1, p. 16. Dr2 noted that
Complainant had not provided requested information about the onset of Diabetes; compliance with
treatment; evidence of neurological and renal complications; an eye doctor’s report; or an exercise
stress test.

In the second MRF, Dr2 did not repeat her earlier demand for the blood glucose log and for
information about hypoglycemic events. However, Dr2 asked for the following:

       1. A copy of Complainant’s eye doctor’s report and a “maximal, stress treadmill exercise
          test;”

       2. A report setting forth the date of the onset of Complainant’s diabetes;

       3. Complainant’s history of ketoacidosis and hospitalizations;

       4. Complainant’s compliance with treatment;

       5. A report on whether Complainant had neurological or renal diabetic complications;

       6. Complainant’s “clinical course over the past 2 years.”

       7. A copy of “all labs” taken over the previous two years, including current C-peptide
          level and current Hemoglobin A1C;

       8. A copy of all outpatient clinic records over the past two years;

       9. Complainant’s orthostatic blood pressure measurements while in the supine position
          and three minutes after standing up;

       10. Complainant’s current complete eye exam by an eye doctor documenting the presence
           or absence of eye disease; and
                                               5                                     0120182095

       11. An assessment of the presence of cardiovascular, neurological, and renal disease.

ROI, Exhibit 12, pp. 1, 2.

On or about June 5, 2014, the ABC District Supervisor asked Complainant if he intended to submit
any additional information to the Agency, and Complainant responded that he believed that he had
already provided information addressing his ability to do the job in his physician’s letter.
Complainant also maintained that he did not comply with Dr2’s request for additional medical
examinations and information because sticking his fingers four times a day to test his glucose
levels would interfere with his ability to hold a gun while working as a CSO. Exhibit 7, p. 4. In a
letter dated June 11, 2014, ABC informed Complainant that he was terminated effective June 12,
2014, as “a direct result of your failure to provide all of the required medical follow-up
documentation mandated by the [Agency] and the FOH necessary to make a determination of your
medical qualification.” ROI, Exhibit 1, p. 18.

On March 10, 2015, Complainant filed an EEO complaint in which he alleged that the Agency
discriminated against him on the basis of disability when from August 1, 2013, until June 11, 2014,
the Agency subjected him to harassing, excessive, and unduly burdensome medical assessments
and to requests for documentation while performing services as a CSO on an Agency contract.
Additionally, Complainant alleged that he was unlawfully terminated from his employment with
ABC Security on June 12, 2014.

AJ’s Decision

After the investigation of Complainant’s complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy
of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. On October 6, 2016, the AJ
issued a Case Management Order in which he stated that he did not believe that the Report of
Investigation contained sufficient information to establish the Commission’s jurisdiction over the
complaint. The AJ required the parties to submit briefs on the topic of jurisdiction.

On October 17, 2016, the Agency submitted a brief conceding the Commission has jurisdiction
over this matter. In an order dated October 17, 2016, the AJ found that the Commission has
“sufficient jurisdiction” over this complaint and that the discovery period had been initiated.
Additionally, the AJ granted Complainant’s October 17, 2016 Motion to Amend his complaint to
reframe the issue as the following:

       Whether Complainant was discriminated against based on his disability (Borderline
       Diabetes) when, between August 1, 2013 and June 11, 2014, the [Agency]
       subjected him to harassing, excessive, and unduly burdensome medical
       assessments and requirements for documentation while he was performing services
       as a Court Security Officer on the Agency contract, and refused to make
       determination that he was medically qualified. Complainant further alleges that
       because the Agency never determined that he was medically qualified, he was
                                               6                                      0120182095

       subsequently terminated from his employment with ABC Security on June 12,
       2014.

On February 7, 2017, Complainant moved for summary judgment, which the Agency opposed on
February 13, 2017. In a decision dated March 29, 2018, the AJ issued summary judgment in favor
of the Agency. Specifically, the AJ first found that Complainant failed to timely contact an EEO
Counselor to raise his allegations. The AJ further found that, even if the complaint was timely,
the Agency’s request for Complainant’s medical information was job-related and a business
necessity. The AJ reasoned that Dr2’s requests were consistent with guidance from the American
College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine (ACOEM), and Complainant did not show
that Dr2’s reliance on the guidance was used to discriminate against him because of his disability.
The AJ further reasoned that Dr2 was charged with making final medical determinations, and her
desire to rely on more than a single-page letter from Complainant’s physician was reasonable.

Additionally, the AJ determined that ABC unilaterally issued the letter of termination without
request or comment from the Agency while the Agency was still awaiting requested medical
documentation from Complainant. Further, the AJ found that Complainant could not prevail on
his termination claim because a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason exists, namely, that
Complainant stated that he would not comply with the Agency’s requests, which the AJ
characterized as reasonable. The Agency subsequently issued a final order fully adopting the AJ’s
findings.

Complainant’s Private Sector Charge with the EEOC

Shortly after filing the instant federal sector complaint, on March 19, 2015, Complainant also filed
a disability discrimination charge with EEOC’s Baltimore Field Office against ABC (Respondent)
challenging his termination. The matter was subsequently transferred to EEOC’s Detroit Field
Office. On May 24, 2018, the EEOC’s Detroit Field Office issued a reasonable cause
determination regarding Complainant’s charge (Charge No. 531-2015-01124). The determination
found, in relevant part, the following:

       The Commission has determined that the evidence obtained during the
       investigation establishes that there is reasonable cause to believe that Respondent
       discriminated against Charging Party in violation of the ADA [Americans with
       Disabilities Act] when it discharged Charging Party due to his disability even
       though Charging Party could perform the essential functions of the job with or
       without accommodation. The investigation revealed that the Charging Party was
       able to work as a Court Security Officer, but that the U.S. Marshals Service
       informed Respondent that Charging Party was medically disqualified due to his
       inability to meet the medical standards established by the U.S. Marshals Service.
       Respondent did not object to the U.S. Marshals Service's direction that the Charging
       Party be removed from his job working as a Court Security Officer nor did
       Respondent provide the U.S. Marshals Service with supplemental medical
       information which would have established that Charging Party was medically
                                               7                                      0120182095

       qualified to work. The investigation finds Respondent similarly discharged or
       placed on unpaid leave due to their disabilities a class of Court Security Officers
       nationwide who were qualified to do the job with or without accommodation from
       at least February 1, 2012 to present. In addition, Charging Party was subjected to
       unnecessary rigorous medical testing by the U.S. Marshals Service and/or Federal
       Occupational Health even though they had sufficient medical information to show
       Charging Party was qualified for the job.

The letter further invited the parties to engage in conciliation to resolve the matter and forwarded
a proposed Conciliation Agreement for their review. On January 12, 2021, the EEOC entered into
a conciliation agreement with ABC.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant maintains that the AJ erred in finding that his complaint was initiated by
untimely EEO Counselor contact. Complainant contends that there is no evidence that the building
where Complainant worked contained posters with the applicable time limits, or that he otherwise
had constructive knowledge of the time limit for initiating Counselor contact. Complainant argues
that because he was directly employed by a contractor instead of a federal agency, it is
unreasonable to expect him to have known that within 45 days of his termination, he had the right
to pursue a discrimination claim against the Agency. Complainant further contends that the AJ’s
decision is inconsistent with a May 24, 2018 reasonable cause determination by the EEOC’s
Detroit Field Office, which found reasonable cause to believe that ABC discriminated against
Complainant in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) when it discharged him.

Additionally, Complainant maintains that the AJ improperly relied upon guidance from the
American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine (ACOEM) to conclude that there
was no discrimination in this case. Complainant contends that ACOEM guidance was not
applicable here because he only had “pre-diabetes,” and the ACOEM guidance concerns law
enforcement officers in general, not CSOs in particular. Complainant also contends that nothing
in ACOEM guidance required the Agency to request all of the information it asked him to submit.

The Agency requests that we affirm its final order but does not raise additional arguments on
appeal.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Federal Sector EEO Process Jurisdiction and EEO Counselor Contact

As an initial matter, we note that the Agency concedes and does not challenge the AJ’s finding
that Complainant’s claim that the Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act falls within the
jurisdiction of the federal sector EEO process. Therefore, we decline to review the AJ’s
determination on jurisdiction.
                                               8                                      0120182095

Regarding timeliness, EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1) requires that complaints of
discrimination should be brought to the attention of the EEO Counselor within forty-five (45) days
of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel action, within
forty-five (45) days of the effective date of the action. The Commission has adopted a “reasonable
suspicion” standard (as opposed to a “supportive facts” standard) to determine when the forty-five
(45) day limitation period is triggered. See Howard v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Request No.
05970852 (Feb. 11, 1999). Thus, the time limitation is not triggered until a complainant reasonably
suspects discrimination, but before all the facts that support a charge of discrimination have
become apparent.

EEOC regulations provide that the agency or the Commission shall extend the time limits when
the individual shows that he was not notified of the time limits and was not otherwise aware of
them, that he did not know and reasonably should not have known that the discriminatory matter
or personnel action occurred, that despite due diligence he was prevented by circumstances beyond
his control from contacting the Counselor within the time limits, or for other reasons considered
sufficient by the agency or the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(2).

Here, the record reveals that Complainant was terminated by ABC on June 12, 2014. Complainant
initiated EEO Counselor contact on February 4, 2015, which is well beyond the 45-day time limit.
However, the Counselor’s Report states that Complainant maintained that he was unaware of the
45-day time limit and did not learn about it until the union told him to file a claim with the
Agency’s EEO office.

The AJ noted that the Agency accepted Complainant’s claims because it had no information that
he was aware of the time limits. The AJ also noted that it was unclear whether the building in
which Complainant worked contained posters with the applicable time limits or if Complainant
had other constructive knowledge of the time limits. Nevertheless, the AJ concluded that
Complainant’s complaint was initiated by untimely EEO Counselor contact because he found that
Complainant should have reasonably suspected discrimination at the time of his termination but
failed to act with due diligence to pursue his legal rights.

Upon review, we note that the Agency concedes that the time limits should be extended here
because there is no record that Complainant was previously apprised of the applicable time limits.
The AJ determined that Complainant failed to exercise due diligence in pursing his EEO rights,
but we find no evidence that Complainant’s initial EEO Counselor contact was so late as to
constitute an unreasonable delay in these circumstances. Consequently, we waive the time limits
in this case, and find that the AJ improperly concluded that Complainant’s complaint was initiated
by untimely EEO Counselor contact.

Summary Judgment

We now must determine whether the AJ appropriately issued the decision without a hearing. The
Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding that there
is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g).
                                                9                                      0120182095

EEOC’s decision without a hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from
federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate
where a judge determines no genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary
standards. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary
judgment motion, the judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed
to weighing the evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the
non-moving party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor.
Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-
moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp.,
846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a
case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
In this case, we carefully reviewed the record and find that it is adequately developed for us to
address the merits of this case. To successfully oppose a decision without a hearing, Complainant
must identify material facts of record that are in dispute or present further material evidence
establishing facts in dispute. Here, there is no evidence that such a dispute exists. As such, the AJ
correctly determined that there are no genuine issues of material fact or credibility that merited a
hearing. Therefore, we find that the AJ’s issuance of a decision without a hearing was appropriate.
However, we determine that summary judgment should have been issued in favor of Complainant,
instead of in favor of the Agency.

Disability-Related Inquiries/Examination

Under the Rehabilitation Act, employers may make disability-related inquires or require medical
examinations of employees only if they are job related and consistent with business necessity. 29
C.F.R. §§ 1630.13(b), 1630.14(c). The Rehabilitation Act does not limit the prohibitions against
improper medical inquiries to individuals with disabilities. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.14(c); Meeker v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A12137 (Aug. 23, 2002). Moreover, generally, a
disability-related inquiry or medical examination of an employee may be ‘job related and
consistent with business necessity’ when an employer “has a reasonable belief, based on objective
evidence, that: (1) an employee's ability to perform essential job functions will be impaired by a
medical condition; or (2) an employee will pose a direct threat due to a medical condition.
Enforcement Guidance on Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical Examinations of Employees
Under the ADA (July 27, 2000) (Enforcement Guidance on Disability-Related Inquiries and
Examinations) at Question 5.

“Objective evidence” is reliable information, either directly observed or provided by a credible
third party, that an employee may have or has a medical condition that will interfere with his ability
to perform essential functions or will result in a direct threat. Id. at Question 7. “Direct threat”
means a significant risk of substantial harm that cannot be eliminated or reduced by reasonable
accommodation. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r); Candi R. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No.
0120172238 (Feb. 28, 2019).
                                                10                                       0120182095

“An employer is entitled only to the information necessary to determine whether the employee can
do the essential functions of the job or work without posing a direct threat.” Enforcement
Guidance on Employee Inquiries and Examinations at Question 13. The burden is on the Agency
to show that one of the criteria justifying the inquiry or examination was met. Hampton v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01986308 (July 31, 2002).

The direct threat evaluation must be based on an individualized assessment of the person’s present
ability to safely perform the essential functions of the job. Alonzo N. v. Dep’t of Homeland
Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120180739 (June 21, 2019). In determining whether an individual
would pose a direct threat, the factors to be considered include: 1) the duration of the risk; 2) the
nature and severity of the potential harm; 3) the likelihood that the potential harm will occur; and
4) the imminence of the potential harm. Candi R. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No.
0120172238.

In this case, we note that Complainant is not challenging the Agency’s annual medical examination
of all CSOs. He is only challenging the Agency’s subsequent medical inquiries/examinations.
After the annual medical examination, the Agency initially asked Complainant to provide it with
at least ten different types of medical information and examinations, including one month of
glucose values performed at least four times per day; cardiovascular, neurological, renal, and
ocular tests, including a treadmill stress test; current hemoglobin measures; the number of
hypoglycemic events in the previous years, and the number of such events that required assistance
from others; a copy of all laboratory results taken over the previous year; a copy of all outpatient
clinic notes taken over the previous year; the date of onset/diagnosis, history of Ketoacidosis,
hospitalizations, and general statement of Complainant’s compliance with diabetic education,
prescribed medications, dietary recommendations, and activity recommendations over the past
year; orthostatic blood pressure measurements while in the supine position and three minutes after
Complainant stands up; and Complainant’s current eye examination by an ophthalmologist.

After Complainant responded to the Agency’s initial medical inquiry, the Agency subsequently
requested that he provide at least eleven types of medical information and examinations, including
an eye doctor’s report and a “maximal, stress treadmill exercise test;” a report setting forth the date
of the onset of Complainant’s diabetes; Complainant’s history of ketoacidosis and hospitalizations;
Complainant’s compliance with treatment; a report on whether Complainant had neurological or
renal diabetic complications; Complainant’s “clinical course over the past 2 years;” a copy of “all
labs” taken over the previous two years, including current C-peptide level and current Hemoglobin
A1C; a copy of all outpatient clinic records over the past two years; Complainant’s orthostatic
blood pressure measurements while in the supine position and three minutes after standing up;
Complainant’s current complete eye exam by an eye doctor documenting the presence or absence
of eye disease; and an assessment of the presence of cardiovascular, neurological, and renal
disease.

Upon review, we note that the Agency’s medical inquiry was precipitated by Complainant’s
disclosure that he was diagnosed with Diabetes Mellitus or Borderline Diabetes.
                                              11                                     0120182095

However, a Diabetes Mellitus diagnosis does not automatically mean an employee is unable to
perform the essential functions of a CSO position, which mostly consists of guarding fixed posts
and screening entrants at courthouses. Therefore, the Agency must provide objective evidence
that Complainant was unable to perform the essential functions of his position. This standard
requires an individualized assessment based on observations about Complainant’s work
performance or conduct, not generalized conclusions, stereotypes, or perceptions about persons
with Diabetes Mellitus.

The Agency relies upon ACOEM’s guidance to justify Complainant’s medical
inquiries/examinations. We note that ACOEM guidance states that “diabetes mellitus may place
LEO’s [law enforcement officers] at risk for sudden incapacitation, thus jeopardizing their ability
to perform critical job functions.” ROI, Exhibit 18, p. 3. The guidance recommends that individual
assessments of law enforcement officers with Diabetes Mellitus should be conducted to determine
the employee’s history of blood glucose control; knowledge of diabetes and its management;
current stability of blood glucose; risk for significant hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia; and
presence of diabetic complications.

However, by stating that law enforcement personnel with Diabetes Mellitus should be
automatically subjected to medical inquiries/examinations, ACOEM’s guidance relies on the type
of generalized stereotypes forbidden by the Rehabilitation Act and contradicts the Rehabilitation
Act’s requirement that medical inquiries/examinations can only be based on individualized
assessments/evidence of employees’ inability to perform the essential functions of their position.
As explained above, we reject the proposition that a mere diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus
automatically means that an agency has a job-related, business-necessity based reason for
subjecting CSOs to medical inquiries. ACOEM’s assertion that persons with Diabetes Mellitus
may be at risk for sudden incapacitation that may jeopardize their ability to perform duties is not
supported by any data or evidence showing to what extent all individuals with Diabetes Mellitus
are prone to such episodes; how often they occur; and to what extent the risk can be reduced or
eliminated through medical treatment and lifestyle. A generalized statement that individuals with
Diabetes Mellitus “may be at risk” is certainly not the type of specific, individualized objective
evidence that allows the Agency to conclude that Complainant was unable to perform the essential
functions of his position, as the Rehabilitation Act requires. As such, ACOEM’s guidance does
not override the requirements and standards of the Rehabilitation Act and, in fact, conflicts with
them. Therefore, the Agency’s medical inquiries/examinations of Complainant cannot be justified
by ACOEM guidance.

After a thorough review of the record, we find that there is simply no evidence that Complainant
experienced or displayed any difficulty performing the essential job functions of his CSO position
because of his medical condition. See Milford R. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No.
0120120081 (Dec. 3, 2015). Instead, it is undisputed that, after Complainant was diagnosed with
Diabetes, ABC’s physician informed the Agency that Complainant was medically qualified for his
CSO position.
                                              12                                     0120182095

Moreover, after the Agency subjected Complainant to the initial medical inquiry, his physician
also reported that Complainant’s medical condition should not impair his ability to perform his
job; he had no diabetic symptoms; displayed no evidence of diabetic eye or cardiac disorders; and
required no medication. We find that the Agency has not presented any evidence from which it
can be reasonably concluded that it possessed objective evidence that Complainant was unable to
perform the essential functions of his position.

The other avenue for the Agency to prove that its medical inquiries/examinations were job-related
and a business necessity is by showing that Complainant posed a threat to himself or others because
of his Diabetes. To prove direct threat, the Agency must show more than that a person stands
some elevated risk of future injury. See Alonzo N. v. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal
No. 0120180739 (June 21, 2019). Rather, a person is a “direct threat” if he poses a “significant
risk of substantial harm” to the health and safety of himself or others which cannot be eliminated
or reduced to an acceptable level by reasonable accommodation. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r); Candi R.
v. Dep't of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 0120172238 (Feb. 28, 2019). The direct threat evaluation
must be based on an individualized assessment of the person's present ability to safely perform the
essential functions of the job. This assessment must be based on a reasonable medical judgment
that relies on the most current medical knowledge and/or on the best available objective evidence.
In determining whether an individual would pose a direct threat, the factors to be considered
include: (1) the duration of the risk, (2) the nature and severity of the potential harm, (3) the
likelihood that the potential harm will occur, and (4) the imminence of the potential harm. Id. The
burden is on the Agency to prove direct threat. Massingill v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, EEOC
Appeal No. 01964890 (July 14, 2000).

Here, the mere fact that Complainant has Diabetes does not constitute evidence that he posed a
direct threat. Moreover, there is simply no individualized evidence that Complainant posed a
significant risk of substantial harm to the health and safety of himself or others which cannot be
eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level.

We note that this case is distinguishable from cases wherein we have found that agencies properly
subjected diabetic employees to medical inquiries and examinations when they displayed a
medical inability to perform work duties. See Head v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
01A12349 (Sep. 4, 2002) (medical inquiry proper when Complainant with Diabetes Mellitus and
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder had an attack of low blood sugar resulting in his nearly fainting
and being unable to perform his duties as a window clerk); Arroyo v. Dep’t of Homeland Security,
EEOC Appeal No. 01A21863 (June 16, 2003) (medical examination proper when employee with
Diabetes who worked as Immigration Inspector at airport suffered many diabetic attacks at work
and was found wandering the airport in an incoherent state). In this case, the Agency has not
shown that there was any cause to reasonably believe that Complainant could not perform the
essential functions of his position. The Agency’s medical inquiry was not prompted by an on-the-
job diabetic episode, but rather by a mere diagnosis. See Boike v. Akal Security, Inc., Case No.
2:17-cv-10109, 2019 WL 4747735 (E.D. Mich. 2019) (direct threat defense and medical
examination analysis require an individualized assessment of the employee’s current ability to
perform the job and a study of reasonable medical knowledge or evidence).
                                                13                                      0120182095

Therefore, we find that the Agency subjected Complainant to medical inquiries/examinations that
violated the Rehabilitation Act.

Moreover, the Agency’s inquiries/examinations were clearly excessive under the Rehabilitation
Act. Under EEOC Guidance, an employer is entitled only to the information necessary to
determine whether the employee can perform the essential functions of the job or work without
posing a direct threat. Enforcement Guidance on Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical
Examinations, Section B, Question 10 (July 27, 2000). Moreover, in most situations, an employer
cannot request an employee's complete medical records, because they are likely to contain
information unrelated to whether the employee can perform his/her essential functions or work
without posing a direct threat. Id.

In this case, not only did the Agency ask for Complainant to undergo a battery of rigorous testing
that included a treadmill exercise stress test and measuring his blood glucose levels four times per
day, but it also asked for him to generally disclose his history of hospitalizations and for a copy of
“all labs” taken over the previous two years. Additionally, the Agency asked for “all [of
Complainant’s] outpatient clinic records” over the previous two years, and Complainant’s history
of all medications, including type and dosage adjustments over the past year. These requests were
sweeping, overbroad demands that Complainant disclose a wide array of medical information that
is likely not related to his Diabetes Mellitus or ability to perform the essential functions of his
position. The Agency failed to narrowly tailor its requests to ensure that its requests did not
constitute fishing expeditions into Complainant’s medical information and history. As such, we
determine that the Agency’s requests for medical information and examinations were clearly
excessive, and therefore violated the Rehabilitation Act.

Termination

Complainant’s refusal to provide medical information demanded by the Agency resulted in his
termination from ABC because the Agency, through its FOH physician, would not clear
Complainant to continue working as a CSO until he provided the requested medical information.
Consequently, we find that the Agency’s improper medical inquiry directly caused Complainant’s
termination. In so finding, we note that we have held that an employer cannot discipline an
employee for failing to comply with an improper request for medical information. Watkins v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01981800 (Aug. 29, 2001).

We further note that, in its submissions to the AJ, the Agency argued that it should not be held
liable here because the FOH physician subjected Complainant to the unlawful medical
inquiries/examinations, and ABC made the decision to terminate him. However, the Agency and
its contractor ABC chose to delegate the authority to medically clear contractor CSOs to the FOH
physician. In fact, in its Reply to Complainant’s Opposition to the Agency’s Motion for Summary
Judgment dated February 13, 2017, the Agency maintained that it made the decision to “reasonably
rel[y] upon the law enforcement occupational medical expertise of FOH.” Agency’s Reply to
Complainant’s Opposition to Agency’s Motion for Summary Judgment, p. 4.
                                               14                                      0120182095

Having purposefully relied on FOH’s decision to subject CSOs to medical inquiries and
examinations, the Agency cannot now disavow liability for these actions. FOH clearly acted as an
agent of the Agency, and Complainant was terminated because of the unlawful medical
examinations/inquiries of the Agency’s agent. See Abe K. v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal Nos.
0120180724 and 0120181492 (May 14, 2018) (where complainant found not medically qualified
for his position by Agency’s agent FOH because he did not meet the Agency's color vision
standard, and he was terminated from his position, Complainant has viable claims against both the
United States Marshals Service and the Executive Office of the U.S. Attorneys). As such, we
conclude that the Agency and ABC are liable for Complainant’s termination and now must jointly
collaborate to remedy this violation of the Rehabilitation Act. See Meeker v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 01A12137 (Aug. 23, 2002) (to remedy wrongful removal for failure to comply
with an improper request for medical information, complainant's immediate reinstatement together
with appropriate additional relief was ordered). Finally, we note that in May 2018, the
Commission’s Detroit Field Office determined that ABC has “similarly discharged or placed on
unpaid leave due to their disabilities a class of [U.S. Marshals Service] Court Security Officers
nationwide who were qualified to do the job with or without accommodation from at least February
1, 2012 to present.” Thus, in the orders below, we direct the Agency to undertake actions designed
to ensure that CSOs throughout the nation are not subjected to unlawful medical inquiries and
examinations.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we REVERSE the Agency’s final order finding no violation of the
Rehabilitation Act. We REMAND this matter to the Agency to take actions consistent with this
decision and the ORDERS set forth below.

                                             ORDER

The Agency shall:

       1.      Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency
               shall request that its contractor (ABC, or the current appropriate contractor) offer
               Complainant conditional reinstatement to his former position of Court Security
               Officer, or a substantially equivalent and agreeable position, retroactive to the date
               of his termination on or about on June 12, 2014. Complainant’s reinstatement to a
               Court Security Officer position shall be dependent on his taking and passing of the
               annual medical examination given to all Court Security Officers, and on his
               eligibility for service in this position under applicable age-based mandatory
               retirement requirements, if any. The Agency shall evaluate Complainant’s medical
               clearance for duty consistent with the standards set forth in the Rehabilitation Act,
               EEOC Guidance, and this decision. Complainant must either accept or reject the
               Agency's offer in writing within 15 calendar days of receipt of the offer.
                                     15                                      0120182095

     Should Complainant reject the offer of reinstatement, his entitlement to any back
     pay attributed to the reinstatement shall terminate as of that date of refusal, unless
     mandatory retirement would have applied to Complainant after the date of his
     termination. If Complainant has already reached the age of mandatory retirement
     for this position, his entitlement to back pay shall terminate on the date he reached
     the age of mandatory retirement for his CSO position.

2.   Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency
     shall collaborate with ABC to determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with
     interest, and other benefits (such as retirement plans) due Complainant (if any),
     pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501. Complainant shall cooperate in efforts to
     compute the amount of back pay and benefits due and shall provide all relevant
     information requested by the Agency. The Agency shall pay the amount within
     sixty (60) calendar days from the date of its determination of the appropriate
     amount. If there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of back pay and/or
     benefits, the Agency shall pay Complainant the undisputed amount within 60 days
     of the date the Agency determines the amount it believes to be due. Complainant
     may petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition
     for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the
     address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's
     Decision.”

3.   Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the back-pay amount is paid to
     Complainant, the Agency shall request that Complainant submit his claim for
     compensation for all additional income-tax liability associated with lump sum
     payments. The Agency shall afford Complainant sixty (60) calendar days to submit
     his claim and supporting documents. The burden of proof to establish the amount
     of additional tax liability, if any, is on Complainant. The calculation of additional
     tax liability must be based on the taxes Complainant would have paid had he
     received the back pay in the form of regular salary during the back pay period,
     versus the additional taxes he paid due to receiving the back-pay in a lump-sum
     award. Thereafter, the Agency shall issue a decision regarding claimed additional
     tax liability within sixty (60) calendar days after the time period expires for
     Complainant to submit his claim for additional tax liability.

4.   Within one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days from the date this decision is
     issued, the Agency will conduct and complete a supplemental investigation on the
     issue of Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages and will afford him
     an opportunity to establish a causal relationship between his termination and
     pecuniary or non-pecuniary losses, if any. Complainant will cooperate in the
     Agency’s efforts to compute the amount of compensatory damages and will provide
     all relevant information requested by the Agency. The Agency shall issue a final
     decision on the issue of compensatory damages within thirty (30) calendar days of
     the completion of its supplemental investigation. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110. The final
                                              16                                      0120182095

               decision shall contain appeal rights to the Commission. The Agency shall submit a
               copy of the final decision to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth herein.

       5.      Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of this decision, the Agency’s EEO and
               Human Resources offices, in collaboration with FOH and ABC (or the current
               appropriate contractor), shall submit a written request for technical assistance from
               EEOC, Office of Federal Operations (OFO), Federal Sector Programs (FSP), on
               revising CSO medical inquiry and examination policies, procedures, and practices
               nationwide to comply with the standards set forth in the Rehabilitation Act, EEOC
               Guidance, and OFO case law. Thereafter, the Agency should ensure that its
               national policies, procedures, and practices for subjecting employees to medical
               inquiries and examinations comply with the standards set forth by the
               Rehabilitation Act and EEOC Guidance.

       6.      Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
               shall provide eight (8) hours of interactive EEO training to all its employees and
               FOH personnel who are involved in directing CSOs to undergo medical
               examinations and inquiries, with an emphasis on the requirements of the
               Rehabilitation Act and EEOC Guidance on this matter.

       7.      The Agency shall pay Complainant reasonable attorney’s fees and costs as set forth
               in the paragraph below entitled “Attorney’s Fees.”

       8.      The Agency shall post the notice referenced in the paragraph below entitled,
               “Posting Order.”

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ORDERED to post at its Greenbelt, Maryland area offices copies of the attached
notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized representative,
shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days
of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in
conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted. The
Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered
by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as
directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision," within 10
calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format, and
must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)),
she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the
complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The
attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment
                                              17                                     0120182095

Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30) calendar days of
receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance
with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 CFR § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               18                                      0120182095

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                19                                        0120182095

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means
the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



_________________________Bernadette B. Wilson’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden
Director

June 23, 2021
Date
