             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                          Lynne E., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 0120170202

                            Agency No. 200P-0154A-2015103527

                                          DECISION

Complainant timely filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s September 7,
2016, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII),
as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission REVERSES
the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the preponderance of the evidence establishes that Complainant
was subjected to a hostile work environment based on sexual orientation.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Readjustment
Counselor, GS-0101-11, at the Agency’s VA Readjustment Counseling Service facility in
Wasilla, Alaska. Complainant is a lesbian. Complainant’s first-line supervisor was a Team
Leader (S1, heterosexual), and her second-line supervisor was the Deputy Regional Manager for
Region 4A (S2, heterosexual).

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     0120170202

S1 hired Complainant in October 2014. Complainant did not live in Alaska when she was hired.
A Clinical Psychologist (C1, heterosexual) stated that she reached out to Complainant after she
was hired and helped her find a place to live before moving to Alaska. Complainant subsequently
moved to Alaska, and she began working at the Wasilla facility on January 25, 2015.

According to Complainant, she was assigned to participate in outreach activities in Sitka, Alaska,
in late February 2015, with C1 and the Outreach Coordinator (C2, heterosexual). Complainant
alleged that, after returning from the trip to Sitka, S1 told her that C1 and C2 were supposed to
allow her to shadow them in Sitka but that he heard that they had “ditched” her at the Sitka Job
Center while they did outreach. The Office Manager (C3, heterosexual) averred that, when C1
heard that Complainant was going to Sitka, she said she would need a larger rental car because
she did not want to sit next to Complainant. Complainant averred that at a March 16, 2015, staff
meeting she asked C1 why she had been ditched at the Sitka Job Center and that C1 and C2
responded that they had not realized that Complainant was supposed to shadow them. C1 stated
that S1 asked her to include Complainant on the trip to Sitka but that he told her to stay at the
Sitka Job Center. According to C1, at the meeting Complainant accused her and C2 of
sightseeing while Complainant was at the Job Center, which would constitute fraud against the
federal government. Complainant stated that on March 17 or 18, 2015, S1 told Complainant that
C1 stated that she had hired a lawyer and was investigating suing Complainant for slander for
insinuating that C1 was not truthful. C1 denied telling S1 that she hired a lawyer. S1 stated that
C1 told him that she had checked with her lawyer and that Complainant’s comments were
slanderous. C2 averred that he heard C1 say that Complainant’s comments were slanderous but
that he did not remember C1 saying that she was going to sue Complainant.

Complainant averred that on April 8, 2015, S1 told her during a meeting that he already knew
that she was a lesbian. S1 stated that Complainant said that she had something to tell him and
that he responded that he already knew what she was going to say, that she was a lesbian.
According to Complainant, S1 said that, after Complainant had been hired, C1 had “Googled”
Complainant and found a September 22, 2002, letter to the editor of a local newspaper in which
Complainant identified herself as a member of the LGBT community. Complainant alleged that
S1 informed her that, in the fall of 2014, C1 showed him the letter to the editor and said that “he
didn’t know what he was doing by hiring [Complainant]” because “Wasilla is not ready for this.”
Complainant also alleged that C1 told S1 that Complainant “would be better off working at the
Fairbanks Vet Center, where there are more gays and lesbians.”

C1 stated that, in November 2014, S1 had asked her to investigate Complainant’s background
and that she found the letter to the editor, which she showed to S1. According to C1, after
looking at the letter to the editor, S1 said, “Oh my gosh, I’ve hired a gay employee.” C1 denied
showing the letter to anyone other than S1 and denied stating that “Wasilla is not ready for this.”
C1 also denied telling S1 that he should not have hired Complainant and denied suggesting that
Complainant would be better off working in Fairbanks. S1 denied asking C1 to investigate
Complainant and stated that C1 showed the letter to the editor to him, C2, and C3. S1 averred
that C1 told him that it was a mistake to hire Complainant and that she should work in Fairbanks
because there were more gay people there.
                                                3                                     0120170202

S1 stated that he did not remember C1 saying that “Wasilla is not ready for this.” C3 stated that
when C1 showed her, S1, and C2 the letter to the editor she told S1, “Look what you did,” and
said, “The Valley is not ready for this.” C2 stated that C1 came to his office to show him
Complainant’s letter to the editor.

Complainant stated that, on April 13, 2015, she asked S1 if they could meet with C1 to discuss
their conflict but that S1 stated that it would only “make things worse” and that he had not done
anything about C1’s comments because he did not want to lose his job. S1 denied saying that he
was afraid of losing his job, but he stated that he was not willing to confront C1 because he
feared that she would retaliate against him. Complainant averred that S1 subsequently told her
that, on April 13, 2015, C1 told S1 that Complainant “had a sense of entitlement” and was going
to “play the gay card.” C1 denied making these statements. S1 stated that C1 said, “These people
have a sense of entitlement.”

According to Complainant, on April 16, 2015, she reported C1’s comments to the Regional
Manager (S3, sexual orientation unknown), and, on April 29, 2015, she reported C1’s comments
to S2. An Anchorage Veterans Center Team Leader (S4, declined to provide his sexual
orientation) averred that, in April 2015, S3 asked him to conduct a fact-finding mission in
Wasilla “to determine why things had become dysfunctional.” S4 averred that, although the
focus of the fact-finding was not C1’s comments, Complainant and S1 both reported during the
fact-finding that C1 had researched Complainant and made comments about her sexual
orientation. According to S4, after the fact-finding, he told S1 to “focus back on the mission” and
the productivity of the team.

Complainant stated that in May 2015 the Associate Regional Manager (S5, heterosexual) came
to Wasilla and that she reported C1’s harassment to him during that visit. According to S5, he
was in Wasilla on June 18 and 19, 2015, for a regularly scheduled site visit, and that
Complainant told him during the site visit that she was being harassed by C1 because of her
sexual orientation. S5 stated that he reported Complainant’s concerns to S2. Complainant averred
that she discussed the possibility of a transfer with S2 to get out of the hostile work environment
and that she was subsequently transferred to the Kenai, Alaska Veterans Center on July 29, 2015.
S2 stated that when Complainant filed an EEO complaint, he stopped investigating the alleged
harassment because the matter would be investigated by an EEO Investigator and he decided to
delay disciplining C1 until a determination was made on the merits of Complainant’s EEO
complaint.

Procedural History

On May 21, 2015, Complainant initiated contact with an EEO Counselor. On June 15, 2015, the
EEO Counselor sent Complainant a letter closing the informal EEO counseling process and a
copy of Notice of the Right to File a Discrimination Complaint. The EEO Counselor described
Complainant’s complaint as a harassment/hostile work environment claim based on sexual
orientation and listed the dates of occurrence as January 2015, February 2015, and April 8, 2015.
Report of Investigation (ROI) at 43.
                                                4                                    0120170202

On June 23, 2015, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her
to a hostile work environment based on sex (sexual orientation). The Agency accepted
Complainant’s claim that she was subjected to harassment on the basis of sexual orientation,
including when:

       1.      On March 17, 2015, C1 threatened to sue Complainant for slander when
               Complainant asked why C1 had not included her in outreach activities in Sitka;
       2.      On April 8, 2015, S1 told Complainant that he already knew that she was lesbian
               because C1 had looked up Complainant online when she was hired in October
               2014, and showed S1 and other coworkers the letter to the editor in which
               Complainant identified herself as a member of the LGBTQ community;
       3.      On April 8, 2015, Complainant learned that C1 said that Complainant should
               work in Fairbanks because there were more gay people there;
       4.      On April 13, 2015, S1 told Complainant that he did not do anything about C1’s
               “Fairbanks comments” because he was afraid to lose his job;
       5.      On April 13, 2015, Complainant learned that C1 said that she had a “sense of
               entitlement” and could not “play the gay card”; and
       6.      On May 19, 2015, C3 told Complainant that she had heard C1 say that “Wasilla
               [was] not ready for this,” referring to Complainant’s sexual orientation, and state
               that S1 “should not have hired [Complainant].”

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Therein, the Agency concluded that Complainant
failed to prove that it had subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

In the final decision, the Agency found that the preponderance of the evidence in the record
established that C1 did perform a background check on Complainant and made negative
comments about her sexual orientation, which Complainant learned about in April and May
2015. Specifically, the Agency determined that, upon finding the letter to the editor in which
Complainant identified her sexual orientation, C1 shared the letter with S1 and her coworkers
and told S1 that he made a mistake in hiring Complainant and that either Wasilla or “the Valley”
was not ready for Complainant because she was a lesbian. The Agency also found that the
preponderance of the evidence established that, during the outreach trip to Sitka, C1 inexplicably
refused to include Complainant in the outreach activities and that, when Complainant
complained about being left behind in Sitka, C1 accused Complainant of slander. The Agency
did not find that preponderant evidence established that C1 threatened to sue Complainant or that
C1 said that Complainant should work in Fairbanks because there were more gay people there,
that gay people have a sense of entitlement, or that Complainant was playing the gay card.

In determining whether Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment, the Agency
noted that, although C1’s comments clearly related to Complainant’s sexual orientation, they
were not made in front of Complainant and only occurred on a few occasions.
                                                5                                    0120170202

The Agency stated that hostile work environments based on sexual orientation tend to include
vulgar, sex-based epithets and threatening or demeaning conduct to be considered severe or
pervasive. The Agency therefore found that the alleged harassment was insufficiently severe or
pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment.

The Agency continued its final decision by assuming arguendo that Complainant established a
hostile work environment and considering whether the Agency took prompt, appropriate, and
effective remedial action as soon as it became aware of the alleged harassment. The Agency
stated that S1 learned about the harassment on April 8, 2015, and that S2 learned about the
harassment in April or May of 2015. The Agency found that several officials visiting Wasilla
conducted some sort of investigation, although S2 discontinued these investigations when
Complainant filed an EEO complaint. In a footnote, the Agency cited Lulverne v. Dep’t of
Health and Human Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01966875 (Oct. 1, 1998) for the proposition that an
agency’s obligation to take prompt, appropriate action in response to allegations of harassment is
independent of the EEO process. Nonetheless, the Agency concluded that it took immediate,
appropriate, and effective action by investigating Complainant’s allegations and by transferring
her to Kenai at her request.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contends that the Agency improperly disregarded her allegations of
harassment beginning in January 2015 and requests that these incidents be considered as part of
her hostile work environment claim. Complainant argues that, even excluding the instances of
harassment that occurred before March 17, 2015, the harassment based on her sexual orientation
was severe and pervasive. According to Complainant, although she did not hear C1 make the
offensive comments about her sexual orientation directly, her first-line supervisor, S1, directly
relayed C1’s homophobic comments to her and also told her that he would not take any
corrective action. Complainant also contends that management failed to investigate her
allegations that she was being harassed or otherwise remedy the harassment. According to
Complainant, because the Agency failed to address her harassment allegations at all for months,
she had no choice but to request a transfer to Kenai because of the ongoing harassment in
Wasilla. Complainant requests that the Commission reverse the Agency’s final decision and
award her $100,000 in compensatory damages, as well as reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.

In response to Complainant’s appeal, the Agency contends that Complainant failed to allege
harassment from January or February 2015 in her formal complaint and notes that she failed to
raise this issue prior to or during the investigation of her complaint. According to the Agency,
when considering the totality of the circumstances, Complainant was not subjected to harassment
that was sufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment. According to
the Agency, it properly and promptly investigated Complainant’s allegations, and she asked to
transfer before the Agency had a chance to rectify the situation. The Agency requests that its
final decision be affirmed.
                                                 6                                     0120170202

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

To establish a claim of harassment based on sexual orientation 2 a complainant must show that:
(1) she belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of
unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on her statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or
condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
(5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682
F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working
environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). The harasser’s conduct
should be evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim’s
circumstances. Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No.
915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994).

With respect to element (5), an employer is subject to vicarious liability for harassment when it
is created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority over the employee.
See Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742, 118 s. Ct. 2257, 2270 (1998); Faragher
v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 118 S. Ct. 2275, 2292-93 (1998). However, where the
harassment does not result in a tangible employment action the agency can raise an affirmative
defense, which is subject to proof by a preponderance of the evidence, by demonstrating: (1) that
it exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any harassing behavior; and (2) that
complainant unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities
provided by the agency or to avoid harm otherwise. See Burlington Industries, supra; Faragher,
supra; Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors,
EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999).


2
  In Bostock v. Clayton County, the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual
orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590 U.S. ___, 140 S. Ct. 1731
(2020); see also Baldwin v. Dep’t of Transportation, EEOC Appeal No. 0120133080 (July 15,
2015) (an allegation of discrimination based on sexual orientation states a claim of sex
discrimination under Title VII because sexual orientation is inherently a sex-based
consideration).
                                                7                                    0120170202

This defense is not available when the harassment results in a tangible employment action (e.g., a
discharge, demotion, or undesirable reassignment) being taken against the employee. In the case
of co-worker harassment, an agency is responsible for acts of harassment in the workplace where
the agency (or its agents) knew or should have known of the conduct, unless it can show that it
took immediate and appropriate corrective action. Id.

In the instant case, the Agency’s acknowledged in its final decision that the preponderance of the
evidence in the record established that Complainant was subjected to harassment based on her
sexual orientation, but that the harassment was not sufficiently severe or pervasive to be
actionable. Specifically, the Agency found that C1 performed a background check on
Complainant, made negative comments about Complainant’s sexual orientation, inexplicably left
Complainant behind while performing outreach in Sitka, and accused Complainant of slander
when Complainant complained about being left behind in Sitka. Accordingly, we consider
whether the harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work
environment.

Hostile Work Environment

In Harris, 510 U.S. at 21, the Supreme Court reaffirmed the holding of Meritor Savings Bank v.
Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 61 (1986), that harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the conditions of the complainant’s employment. Where a complaint does not
challenge an agency action or inaction regarding a specific term, condition, or privilege of
employment, a claim of harassment is actionable only if, allegedly, the harassment to which the
complainant has been subjected was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the
complainant’s employment. An abusive or hostile work environment exists “when the workplace
is permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule and insult that is sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the condition of the victim's employment.” Meritor, 477 U.S. at 65.

Here, before Complainant even began working in Wasilla, the small VA Readjustment
Counseling Service facility was already abuzz with negative gossip about Complainant’s sexual
orientation, as early as November 2014. According to the record, C1 told S1, C2, and C3 that
Complainant was a lesbian, that it therefore was a mistake to have hired her, that Wasilla was
“not ready” for Complainant because of her sexual orientation, and that Complainant should
work in a community with more gays and lesbians. Although Complainant did not learn about
C1’s comments until April 2015, we find that the sexual orientation-based comments were
sufficiently pervasive to alter the terms of Complainant’s employment, poisoning the
environment before Complainant had even started work. On April 8, 2015, Complainant not only
learned that her supervisor and all of her coworkers had been aware of her sexual orientation for
approximately six months, but she also learned that one of her coworkers, C1, did not want to
work with her because of her sexual orientation and had made comments to that effect to the
whole office. Complainant had previously learned that C1 did not include her in outreach
activities in Sitka as directed by S1, and the record also reflects that, when C1 heard that
Complainant would be going to Sitka, C1 said she would need a larger rental car because she did
not want to sit next to Complainant.
                                                8                                     0120170202

Complainant repeatedly asked various management officials for help with the situation, but her
only recourse was to request a transfer to a different location when various investigations did not
alter the hostile work environment. From the viewpoint of a reasonable person, these
circumstances reflect harassment that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute an
actionable claim, i.e., a hostile work environment. We will next consider whether the Agency is
liable for this hostile work environment.

Agency’s Liability for the Hostile Work Environment

From the record, it is undisputed that management was aware of C1’s sexual orientation-based
harassment of Complainant. Taylor v. Dep't of the Air Force, EEOC Request No.
05920194 (July 9, 1992) (employers will generally be deemed to have constructive
knowledge of harassment that is openly practiced in the workplace or is well-known
among employees). In fact, S1 was aware that C1 had been spreading rumors and making
negative comments about Complainant’s sexual orientation months before Complainant even
began working in Wasilla, and he was the one who first relayed C1’s smear campaign against
Complainant to her in April 2015. S1 conceded that he told Complainant that he was reluctant to
confront C1 about her behavior because he was worried that she would retaliate against him.
Moreover, the inadequate response from management may even have emboldened C1 to
continue harassing Complainant. Debbra R. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No.
0120161305 (July 26, 2016) (finding that when harassment is repeated, a supervisor’s failure to
respond to instances of alleged harassment heightens the severity of the alleged act).

Various other management officials subsequently came to Wasilla and learned about C1’s
conduct while in Wasilla for other reasons, but the record does not reflect that anyone thoroughly
investigated Complainant’s allegations. According to the record, S4 visited Wasilla in April 2015
to investigate a generally dysfunctional work environment, and S5 came to Wasilla in May or
June 2015 for a regularly scheduled site visit. S2 stated that the Agency stopped investigating
Complainant’s harassment allegations when she filed an EEO complaint and deferred
consideration of further measures, such as disciplinary action against C1, pending the outcome of
the EEO investigation. Other than allowing Complainant to transfer to Kenai in late July 2015,
months after Complainant reported the harassment, no corrective actions were taken. As the
footnote in the Agency’s final decision reflected, the filing of an EEO complaint does not relieve
the Agency of its obligation to take corrective action in response to allegations of harassment.
We therefore find that the Agency is liable for the hostile work environment because it failed to
take immediate and appropriate corrective action.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we REVERSE the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination and REMAND the matter for further processing in accordance with this decision
and the ORDER below.
                                               9                                     0120170202

                                            ORDER

The Agency shall take the following remedial actions:

   1. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      conduct a supplemental investigation concerning Complainant’s entitlement to
      compensatory damages and issue a final decision with appeal rights to Commission that
      determines the amount of compensatory damages due Complainant. Within thirty (30)
      calendar days of determining the amount of compensatory damages due Complainant, the
      Agency shall pay her that amount.

   2. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      restore to Complainant any paid leave or compensate her for any unpaid leave taken as a
      result of the discriminatory harassment or to facilitate her transfer from Wasilla to Kenai.

   3. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      provide a minimum of eight hours of in-person or interactive EEO training, with a special
      emphasis on harassment, to all employees at the Wasilla VA Readjustment Counseling
      Service, as well as C1, S1, S2, S3, S4, and S5.

   4. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      consider disciplinary action against C1, S1, S2, S3, S4, and S5. The Commission does not
      consider training to constitute discipline. The Agency shall report its decision to the
      Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides not to discipline these individuals, it shall
      specify the reason(s). If any of these individuals have left the Agency, it shall furnish
      evidence of their departure dates.

   5. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall post
      a notice in accordance with the statement entitled “Posting Order.”

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include evidence that the corrective action has been implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Wasilla, Alaska VA Readjustment Counseling Service
facility copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's
duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for
60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
                                                10                                    0120170202

The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the
paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of
the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format and must be submitted
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 CFR § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               11                                   0120170202

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0620)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if the complainant or
the agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish
that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 12                                     0120170202

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 17, 2021
Date
