               U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                             Office of Federal Operations
                                    P.O. Box 77960
                               Washington, DC 20013


                                       Charles L. Burgett, 1
                                         Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                         Janet L. Yellen,
                                            Secretary,
                                   Department of the Treasury
                                   (Internal Revenue Service),
                                             Agency.

                                    Request No. 2021002558

                                     Appeal No. 2021000151

                                   Agency No. IRS-19-1148-F

                     DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021000151 (February 23, 2021).
EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant was an applicant for employment with the Agency. Complainant filed an EEO
complaint alleging he was discriminated against on the bases of race (African American), sex
(male) and reprisal when he was not selected for numerous positions with the Agency. The
positions were Tax Examining Technician (5 positions) and Collection Contact Representative (2
positions), located in various areas.

Complainant did not request a hearing. Our prior appellate decision affirmed the Agency’s final
decision that concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged.



1
    Complainant requested that no pseudonym be used.
                                               2                                    2021002558

The decision noted that Complainant had previously been removed from a Tax Examining
Technician position for misconduct – being Absent Without Official Leave. He was hired again
by the Agency as a full-time seasonal Tax Examining Clerk until he was removed during his
probationary period due to unacceptable performance. The decision also noted that the Agency
utilized the Automated Labor and Employee Relations Tracking System to review prior
performance and conduct of applications which revealed Complainant’s separation during his
probationary period, removal for AWOL, and conduct issues resulting in disciplinary action.
Thus, Complainant was not selected for the positions at issue. In addition, no selections were
made in some instances.

In his request for reconsideration, Complainant expresses his disagreement with the previous
decision and presents some arguments he has made before. We emphasize that a request for
reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. See EEO MD-110, Ch. 9, § VII.A.
Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial
impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not done so
here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021000151 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  3                                     2021002558

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 25, 2021
Date
