             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                        Katharine B., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                     Thomas W. Harker,
                                      Acting Secretary,
                                   Department of the Navy,
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020003290

                                 Agency No. 19-67400-04159

                                         DECISION

On April 27, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
March 30, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Hotel Manager, NF-
117304, with the Marine Corps Installation Pacific at the Marine Corps Base Camp in Butler,
Japan.

On March 6, 2019, Complainant sent an email to the Assistant Chief of Staff, Corps Community
Services (MCCS) Okinawa, stating she heard the Lodging Program Manager (LPM1) had
decided to retire and requested to be considered for any upcoming vacancies because she wanted
to return to Okinawa. The Assistant Chief of Staff informed her she was welcome to compete.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2020003290

On June 26, 2019, the Agency posted a job announcement for the position of Lodging Program
Manager (LPM) (Job ID: 38551), Lodge Program, Camp Foster, in Okinawa, Japan for internal
MCCS candidates only. Since the job announcement was for internal candidates only,
Complainant did not apply for the position and was not selected for the position. The selecting
official for the position was the Retail Program Manager who selected the best qualified internal
candidate (LPM2) to fill the position. Complainant believed the decision to restrict the area of
consideration to internal candidates for the LPM position in 2019 was made to prevent her from
applying for the position as the position had previously been announced to internal and external
candidates in 1998 and 2017.

As noted, Complainant had previously applied for the LPM position in 2017 (Job ID: 25869).
No selection was made, and the job announcement was cancelled on July 5, 2017 after
interviews had been conducted. Complainant was notified of her non-selection on July 6, 2017.
The position was filled when the Chief Business Officer non-competitively reassigned LPM1
back into his previous role as LPM. LPM1 was the Chief of Retail when the position became
available and he had requested to be reassigned back to LPM, a position he had held with
outstanding results within the previous 12 months.

On July 2, 2019, Complainant sent an email to a retired MCCS coworker (CW), asking for
information about her non-selection for the LPM position in 2017 (Job ID: 25869). CW replied,
stating he had asked LPM1 about Complainant not being selected for the LPM position and
LPM1 informed CW that he felt the Executive Branch did not want Complainant because she
pushed back on different issues and that the Director, Operations Assurance (Director) believed
Complainant and CW did not sell alcohol at their front desk because of their Christian values.

On July 18, 2019, the Agency posted a job announcement for Assistant Lodging Program
Manager (Job ID: 38971) with the MCCS Okinawa Japan. Complainant submitted her
application and she was one of the nine applicants determined to be qualified and referred for
interviews out of 82 total applicants. On September 9, 2019, she was interviewed by three panel
members, including LPM2, who was the selecting official for the position. On November 25,
2019, the Agency informed Complainant that she was not selected for the Assistant Lodging
Program Manager (Job ID: 38971) position.

On September 4, 2019 (and later amended), Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that
she was subjected to discrimination by the Agency on the bases of race (African-American),
color (Black), national origin (African-American), sex (female), religion (Christian), age
(YOB:1963), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1. On or about July 1, 2019, the job announcement for the Lodging Program Manager
       (Job ID: 38551) was made for internal candidates only, effectively excluding her from
       eligibility;
                                                 3                                     2020003290

       2. On or about July 2, 2019, she became aware via email from a former MCCS employee
       that the reason for her non-selection for the Lodging Program Manager (Job ID: 25869)
       in 2017 was discriminatory; and

       3. On November 25, 2019, she was not selected for the Assistant Lodging Program
       Manager (Job ID: 38971) with the MCCS Okinawa Japan.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final Agency decision (FAD). In
accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

In the FAD, the Agency determined that management articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for its actions. Specifically, in Claim 1, the Agency’s limitation of applicants to internal
MCCS candidates in its vacancy announcement for the position of LPM (Job ID: 38551) in 2019
was made to further the Agency’s goal to support organization succession planning and upward
mobility opportunities of current employees. Additionally, the decision was further supported
because MCCS had employees with the requisite skill, knowledge, and abilities for the job at the
time of the vacancy. The Chief of NAF Human Resources (HR Chief) stated the decision was
made in accordance with the Agency’s personnel policy manual. The HR Chief explained that
MCCS Okinawa received a policy interpretation from the Headquarters Human Resources team
in February 2019, allowing internal recruitment to assist career path progression of MCCS
employees. MCCS Okinawa had been unaware of this provision and after receiving written
confirmation from Headquarters of the policy, the vacancy announcement for Lodging Program
Manager (Job ID: 38551) was the first time it was used. The Retail Program Manager, the
selecting official for the position, stated the selected applicant (LPM2) was the most qualified for
the position and he had no knowledge of Complainant’s interest in the position.

Pertaining to Complainant’s non-selection in Claim 2, the HR Chief explained that it was not
unusual for a selection not to be made for a position. LPM1 received a reassignment back into
the LPM position based on having the necessary qualifications and holding the same level
position. Further, reassigning LPM1 saved the Agency money and time and his experience
resulted in continued and expanded financial success of the program. The decision to reassign
LPM1 occurred after the Agency had interviewed candidates for the position, but before a
selection was made and resulted in cancelling the vacancy announcement. Additionally, the
Director stated he was not part of the hiring process for the 2017 LPM (Job ID: 25869) vacancy
announcement. He explained that on October 8, 2017, he discussed with LPM1 that LPM1 was
restricting alcohol sales at the Westpac Lodge in a manner that did not follow MCCS Lodging
Policy. LPM1 acknowledged the mistake and adjusted how alcohol was sold to comply with the
policy. The Director averred the conversation did not involve Complainant or her religious
values.
                                               4                                   2020003290

With respect to Claim 3, LPM2 was the selecting official for the Assistant Lodging Program
Manager position and the decision was made in concurrence with the Retail Program Manager
and the Deputy Director (Business and Support). Nine of 82 total applicants were determined to
be minimally qualified and referred for interviews. The panel interviewed and scored each
candidate individually. LMP2 stated the panel unanimously agreed on the highest rated
candidate, who was selected for the position (ALPM-Selectee). LPM2 stated ALPM-Selectee’s
selection and high ranking was due to her deep involvement with the creation of databases and
the execution and future roll-out of a new property management system essential to the success
of the MCCS Lodging program. Even though Complainant held a higher-level position as LPM
for 18 years, LPM2 stated the Lodging Program had evolved since 2015. He cited ALPM-
Selectee was more qualified because she had current experience with the Inns of the Corps
lodging program, its brand development, branding standards, current operating procedures and
forthcoming property management software, and relevant work experience in the private hotel
sector.

The Agency concluded Complainant failed to show management’s legitimate explanations were
pretextual. As a result, the Agency found that Complainant had not been subjected to
discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of
a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas,
411 U.S. at 802 n. 13. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately
prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's
explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S.
                                                5                                     2020003290

133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Hon. Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Tx. Dep’t of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

In the instant case, assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of
reprisal and race, color, national origin, sex, religion, and age discrimination, the Commission
finds that Complainant failed to present evidence to rebut the Agency's legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. With regard to Claim 1, as detailed above, the Agency
had recently learned from Headquarters that they could announce a vacancy and limit the initial
area of consideration to internal candidates to assist career path progression of MCCS
employees. The HR Chief explained the business decision regarding the area of consideration
for an individual job vacancy announcement, i.e. internal MCCS candidates or external, is based
upon the facts and circumstances that exist at the time of each job announcement. One item of
consideration is whether there are sufficient internal candidates with the requisite knowledge,
skills and abilities for the job at the time of the vacancy, which was the case here. The Director,
NAD Human Resources affirmed these statements, explaining it allowed for career progression
and is ultimately a cost saving decision for the organization. Ultimately, the internal selectee
was determined to be the best qualified based on his experience in the hotel business and
successful service as the Assistant MCCS Lodging Program Manager,

As to Claim 2, the announcement was cancelled, and the position was filled following LPM1’s
reassignment to the position. LPM1 had previously held the position and performed an
outstanding job and his reassignment into the position allowed the Agency to save money and
time. As discussed above, the Director denied making any comments or references to
Complainant’s religion; rather, he affirmed he simply discussed and clarified the alcohol sales
policy with LPM1.

Finally, regarding Claim 3, the interview panel unanimously recommended ALPM-Selectee as
the best qualified for the position based on her top interview score of 64 points. The Hiring
Selection and Non-Selection Justification for Assistant Lodging Program Manager Memorandum
from LMP2 states that the interview panel ranked Complainant tied with another applicant with
40 points. Additionally, LMP2 noted ALPM-Selectee’s extensive and broad hotel and lodging
experience, quick career development, and her detailed knowledge of the fundamentals of the
Agency’s new property management system set her apart from other candidates. LMP2
acknowledged Complainant’s vast lodging experience; however, he stated that she portrayed
herself as an executive providing staff with direction, rather than a team member who would be
able to work alongside the team to accomplish tasks and projects and failed to provide
satisfactory answers to some interview questions. As a result, ALPM-Selectee was chosen for
the position as the best qualified candidate.

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency's stated reasons are merely a
pretext for discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 9,
1996). Complainant can do this directly by showing that the Agency’s proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence. Tx. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.
                                                 6                                     2020003290

We note that Complainant chose not to request a hearing; therefore, the Commission does not
have the benefit of an Administrative Judge’s credibility determinations after a hearing and can
only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. The Commission finds no
persuasive evidence that Complainant's protected classes were a factor in any of the Agency's
selection decisions. In particular, with respect to Claim 3, Complainant failed to show that her
qualifications for the position were plainly superior to those of the selectee. In this case, the
selectee had attributes that justified her selection, and the selection officials affirmed that they
believed ALPM-Selectee was better equipped to meet the Agency's needs. In the absence of
evidence of unlawful discrimination, the Commission will not second guess the Agency's
assessment of the candidates' qualifications. Tex. Dept. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at
259. While Complainant believes that she was more qualified based on her overall experience,
the Commission notes that number of years of experience, alone, is insufficient to establish that a
candidate's qualifications are observably superior. See Kopkas v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120112758 (Oct. 13, 2011). Furthermore, to the extent that Complainant believes
that preselection occurred in any of the positions at issue, we note that Complainant has not
shown that any such preselection was motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus.
Goostree v. Tennessee, 796 F.2d 854, 861 (6th Cir. 1986).

At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance
of the evidence that the Agency’s reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on
the basis of discriminatory animus. Complainant failed to carry this burden. As a result, the
Commission finds that Complainant has not established that she was subjected to discrimination
or reprisal as alleged.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, it is the decision of the Commission to AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision because the preponderance of the evidence of record does not establish that
discrimination occurred.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision.
                                                  7                                     2020003290

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs.
                                                  8                                     2020003290

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request
the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court
costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has
the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time
limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 3, 2021
Date
