             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                           Gilbert S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                    Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                           Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                            (Transportation Security Administration),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020004388

                                 Agency No. TSA-02194-2019

                                           DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated April 16, 2020, finding no discrimination
concerning his complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was an applicant for
employment at the Agency.

On September 17, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination based on
race/national origin (Asian American), color (olive tan), age (over 40), and in reprisal for prior
EEO activity when on August 18, 2019, he learned that management excluded him from the
interview process of the Federal Security Director (FSD), SV-0343-K Band, position advertised
under Job Vacancy Announcement No. HS-SO-19-582518-ERD.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020004388


After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency issued its
final Agency decision concluding that it asserted legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
action, which Complainant failed to rebut.

Complainant was a retired Assistant Federal Security Director (AFSD), J Band, for Mission
Support at the Jackson-Medgar Wiley International Airport (JAN) in Jackson, Mississippi. He
retired effective March 1, 2018. 2 On May 19, 2019, Complainant applied for the FSD, K Band,
position at the JAN but was not hired.

The Agency indicated that Human Resources initially referred 26 qualified candidates’ resumes,
including Complainant’s, to a three-member panel, who reviewed their applications and resumes.
The review panel was looking for candidates who had strength in the criteria of leading change,
leading people, building coalitions, critical incident management/communication, and business
acumen. Especially, the panel was looking for candidates who had an ability to provide day-to-
day operational leadership for Federal security responsibilities at an airport. After a review of
applications and resumes, the panel choose seven candidates for an interview. The panelists
indicated that Complainant’s resume did not demonstrate he possessed the background,
experience, or skill set to serve as the highest-ranking airport authority. Candidates were only
interviewed if at least two panel members selected their name for an interview. All three panel
members did not select Complainant for an interview, and he, thus, was not hired for the position
at issue. A Selectee, one of the seven candidates who was referred for an interview, was
ultimately selected for the position.

The record reveals that the Selectee was an Acting AFSD, J Band, for Mission Support at the
JAN from October 2017 to January 2018; he was a Human Resources Specialist, H Band, at the
JAN since July 2016; and prior to that, he was an Army National Guard Deputy Commander
supervising and directing day-to-day activities of over 3,100 troops from January 2009 to May
2012.

Complainant’s former second level supervisor (S2), African American, the Regional Director,
was a chair of the review panel. Complainant claimed that S2 initially hired his former first level
supervisor (S1), a FSD, also African American, and S1 was responsible for hiring the Selectee,
who had no Transportation Security Administration (TSA) experience. He also indicated that
S1, S2, and the Selectee were all close acquaintances and African Americans, and S2
demonstrated favoritism in selecting the Selectee for the position at issue.

S2 stated that prior to Complainant’s retirement, S1 informed him that S1 was having ongoing
issues with Complainant regarding S1’s supervision, communication, and guidance of
Complainant.


2
 Complainant’s constructive discharge claim is not at issue. The record indicates that he filed an
appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board regarding that matter.
                                                3                                     2020004388

The record reflects that S1 issued Complainant an Improvement Period Notice (IPN) dated
October 18, 2017, informing him of his unacceptable performance as an AFSD. Therein,
Complainant was provided with the opportunity to improve his performance to the satisfactory
level and was notified that his Fiscal Year 2017 performance rating would be deferred until this
IPN was successfully completed. The record also reveals that Complainant was issued a
performance counseling on May 15, 2017.

Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law").

After a review of the record, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination. We find that Complainant failed to
rebut the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for not selecting Complainant for the
FSD position. There is no evidence of a discriminatory motivation on the part of S1 or S2 for
selecting the Selectee, who was the Acting AFSD from October 2017 to January 2018. The
record indicates that Complainant did not work well with S1 and had performance issues before
he retired from his AFSD position in March 2018. Complainant indicates that the Selectee was
selected despite his interview score by the panel. The Agency indicates that S2 was not a
selecting official for the FSD position at issue and S2 did not recommend the Selectee as the first
choice for the position; rather, the Executive Resource Council (ERC) at TSA headquarters made
the selection decision for the FSD position, along with all FSD positions nationwide. The ERC
selected the Selectee despite his low interview score based on his current successful work
performance, including his extensive military leadership experience. Upon review, we find that
Complainant failed to show that his qualifications for the position were plainly superior to the
Selectee’s qualifications. See Wasser v. Department of Labor, EEOC Request No. 05940058
(November 2, 1995).

Based on the foregoing, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s action was
motivated by discrimination as he alleged.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.
                                                4                                    2020004388


                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                5                                     2020004388

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                       Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 18, 2021
Date
