             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Bruce P.,1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                       Chad F. Wolf,
                                      Acting Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                          (Federal Emergency Management Agency),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 0120182117

                             Agency Nos. HS-FEMA-24561-2015,
                                        HS-FEMA-26773-2016

                                          DECISION

Complainant timely filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s May 7, 2018,
final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the record is adequately developed for us to determine whether
the Agency properly found that Complainant did not prove that it had violated the Rehabilitation
Act.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Emergency
Management Specialist, GS-0089-09, at the Agency’s Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Recovery Directorate, Response/Recovery Branch, located in Windsor, Missouri.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    0120182117

Complainant was hired for this position in July 2014. The position required him to travel 300
days out of the year. After Complainant accepted the offer of the position, his first Supervisor
(RMO1) informed him that he would be required to be immediately deployed. Complainant
sought a delay in the deployment. Complainant received a 31-day delay to his start date. During
that time, Complainant informed the Agency that he needed medical testing.

Two months later in September 2014, he requested reasonable accommodations for his medical
conditions. Complainant indicated that he has Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) with
psychogenic seizures and depression. He noted that he could not meet the deployment
requirement for the position in question. He indicated that his doctor (Physician) restricted him
from driving and permitted him to telework. The Physician noted that his disability had many
triggers such as bad weather. As a result of his medical condition, Complainant would become
disoriented and aggravated or have seizures. Complainant asserted he could perform his position
until his medical condition was triggered. During this time, RMO 1 stated that she gave the
Complainant a few assignments to do at home, but it was never intended to be an ongoing
telework situation, since the expectation was that he would deploy. Complainant was never
deployed.

RMO 1 stated that she did not believe that the Complainant could perform the essential functions
of his job since the essential function of the job was to deploy and serve in a disaster area. She
explained that the position was created for the sole purpose of deployment to a disaster area. She
stated that the medical documentation was unclear as to when the Complainant would be
available to deploy. She shared that the positions are funded by the Stafford Act to assist with
disasters in the field and therefore, the Complainant could not perform the essential functions of
the job since the essential function of the job was to deploy and serve in a disaster area. The
primary purpose of the job was for staff to deploy.

In May 2015, Complainant had a new supervisor (RMO2) as RMO1 became his second-line
supervisor. Complainant made RMO2 aware of his need for reasonable accommodations.
Complainant requested the following reasonable accommodations: no travel, telework from
home with support system, flexible schedule while on telework, random duties as assigned by
management. From September 2014 and onward, Complainant asserted he was threatened with
being placed in an “off-duty” status for failing to be available for deployment and was issued low
performance appraisals.

The Agency determined that Complainant could not perform the essential functions of his
position by December 2015, noting that deployment was an essential function of the position.
Management indicated that Complainant’s position was funded by the Stafford Act to assist with
disasters in the field. Management sought a suitable position for Complainant and limited their
search to the region in which he lived. Management noted that its search was limited to FEMA
and CORE positions because those positions were the only Stafford Act positions to which
Complainant could be reassigned. Management indicated that there were two positions
identified. However, Complainant declined both positions.
                                               3                                    0120182117

Complainant noted that he required a stress-free environment and that he should avoid negative
settings, needed a safe area to lie down, and no disaster, betrayal, or trauma triggers. After
Complainant declined the positions, the Agency issued a termination notice on July 22, 2016.

On July 10, 2015, during the reasonable accommodation process, Complainant contacted the
EEO counselor alleging that he was subjected to discrimination. On August 11, 2015,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint, namely HS-FEMA-24521-2015, alleging that the Agency
subjected him to harassment on the bases of disability (mental condition) and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity under the Rehabilitation Act. In support of his claim, Complainant
asserted that the following events occurred:

       1.     Since September 2014 and ongoing, Complainant has been denied a reasonable
              accommodation and was told that his position did not allow for telework.
       2.     On July 10, 2015, Complainant was threatened with being placed in a non-pay
              status because he could not be deployed.
       3.     From May 2015 until February 2017, Complainant received a low performance
              evaluation as a result of the denial of a reasonable accommodation.

Subsequently, on July 13, 2016, Complainant contacted the EEO Counselor asserting that the
Agency had continued to engage in harassment and discrimination. On October 14, 2016,
Complainant filed a second formal EEO complaint, namely HS-FEMA-26773-2016, alleging
that the Agency subjected him to harassment on the bases of disability (mental condition) and
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity. In support of his claim, Complainant asserted that the
following events occurred:

       4.     On or about September 14, 2014, Complainant’s reasonable accommodation
              request was not processed in a timely manner, or according to the Agency’s
              reasonable accommodation program.
       5.     On June 21, 2016, Complainant was issued a memorandum from his supervisor
              (Supervisor) denying him a reassignment under the reasonable accommodation
              process.
       6.     On July 22, 2016, Complainant was issued a memorandum from the Supervisor
              terminating his appointment, effective July 22, 2016, based on Complainant’s
              inability to perform as a result of a medical condition.
       7.     On August 19, 2016, Complainant was issued a memorandum from the
              Supervisor clarifying that the June 21, 2016 memorandum was a denial of the
              request for a reasonable accommodation requested on September 14, 2014.

The Agency accepted the complaints for investigation. Each complaint was investigated
separately. In HS-FEMA-24521-2015, the investigator focused solely on the issues raised in that
complaint regarding Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodations and the low
performance evaluations.
                                               4                                   0120182117

In HS-FEMA-26773-2016, the investigation included affidavits from the National Reasonable
Accommodation Coordinator (Coordinator) who indicated that Human Resources was to engage
in a search for a reassignment position for Complainant and noted that the search by the Agency
was limited only to FEMA and to Stafford Act-funded positions.

At the conclusion of the investigations, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). With respect to the first complaint, Complainant failed to make an
election. Following the notice from the Agency regarding the second EEO complaint,
Complainant requested a final Agency decision. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the
Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency consolidated
the EEO complaints and issued a decision concluding that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant appealed the Agency’s decision. He argued that the Agency failed to follow its
reasonable accommodation process. Complainant indicated that he was upset that his medical
condition was included in his termination notice and the denial of reasonable accommodation.
He claimed that he conducted the duties he could. He also sought the following reasonable
accommodations: no travel, telework from home with support system, flexible schedule while on
telework, random duties as assigned by management. He asserted that his duties and
assignments were extremely limited and others who could not be deployed were given
alternative duties. Complainant also questioned why it took two years to process the reasonable
accommodation request and then terminate him following their limited search for a
reassignment. In closing, Complainant asserted that he was subjected to discrimination, was
deliberately denied reasonable accommodations, and made to feel uncomfortable. As such,
Complainant asked that the Commission reverse the Agency’s final decision.

The Agency presented no arguments on appeal.

                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard
of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                   5                                       0120182117

                                   ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Complainant contends that he was denied a reasonable accommodation for his disability in 2014-
2016, as well as subjected to harassment and disparate treatment based on his disability and
previous EEO activity. Complainant’s disparate treatment and harassment claims are closely
intertwined with his reasonable accommodation claim such that the Agency’s explanations for its
actions relate to the entirety of Complainant’s complaint.

Regarding the reasonable accommodation claim, under the Commission’s regulations, an agency
is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical and mental limitations of
an otherwise qualified individual with a disability unless the agency can show that
accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9. To establish that he was
denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: (1) he is an individual with a
disability, as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) he is a “qualified” individual with a disability
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed to provide his with a reasonable
accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue
Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002)
(Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation). The term “qualified,” with respect to
an individual with a disability, means that the individual satisfies the requisite skill, experience,
education and other job-related requirements of the employment position such individual holds
and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the
position. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).

A request for a modification or change at work because of a medical condition is a request for
reasonable accommodation. Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation at Question
1. After receiving a request for reasonable accommodation, an agency “must make a reasonable
effort to determine the appropriate accommodation.” 29 C.F.R. pt. 1614. app. § 1630.9. Thus, “it
may be necessary for the [agency] to initiate an Informal, interactive process with the individual
with a disability . . . [to] identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential
reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3);
see also 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. § 1630.9; Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation at Question 5.

Reasonable accommodation includes such modifications or adjustments as job restructuring, the
acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, and reassignment to a vacant position. 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii). In general, reassignment is the reasonable accommodation of last
resort and should be considered only when (1) there are no effective accommodations that would
enable an employee to perform the essential functions of his or her current position or (2)
accommodating the employee in the current position would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R.
pt. 1630 app. § 1630.2(n); Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation,
“Reassignment.”
                                                 6                                     0120182117

Assuming arguendo that Complainant was an individual with a disability within the meaning of
the Rehabilitation Act, we note that a qualified individual with a disability is defined as an
individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the
essential functions of the position held or desired. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); see also Struthers v.
Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 07A40043 (June 29, 2006) (complainant has the threshold
burden of establishing that she is a qualified individual with a disability).

In this case, Complainant requested a reasonable accommodation when he presented restrictions
from the Physician indicating that Complainant was diagnosed with PTSD with psychogenic
seizures and depression. We note that the Agency found that Complainant established that he is
an individual with a disability covered by the Rehabilitation Act in its final decision. We discern
no basis to reject the Agency’s finding.

Further, the Agency found that Complainant clearly could not perform the essential function of
his position, namely deployment. We note that Complainant was hired by the Agency for his
position as an Emergency Management Specialist. This is a position which requires travel up to
300 days a year. Complainant did not establish that he was a qualified individual with a
disability. There is no reasonable accommodation that would enable Complainant to perform the
essential function of deployment or travel for the Emergency Management Specialist position.
Under these circumstances, Complainant cannot perform the essential function of the position for
which he was hired.

In addition, Complainant is not eligible for reassignment because he was never qualified for the
position for which he was hired. See Shelley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0720070076 (June 14, 2012) (finding that the complainant, a probationary employee, was unable
to establish that he was qualified or entitled to a reassignment because he could not establish that
he could perform the essential functions of his position for which he was hired after he was
hospitalized due to a medical condition after working for the agency for several days.) Here,
because Complainant has not demonstrated that he could perform the essential functions of the
position for which he was hired, we find that he has not established that he is a qualified
individual with a disability entitled to a reassignment.

Therefore, we determine that Complainant has not established that the Agency violated the
Rehabilitation Act when the it failed to provide him with a reassignment. We noted above that
Complainant’s claims of harassment and disparate treatment were related to his claim that the
Agency failed to provide him with a reasonable accommodation. Based on our determination
that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination regarding the Agency’s denial of
reasonable accommodation, we similarly cannot find that Complainant was subjected to
discriminatory disparate treatment or harassment in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, based on a thorough review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.
                                                7                                     0120182117

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0617)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider the decision in this case if the Complainant or
the Agency submits a written request containing arguments or evidence which tend to establish
that:

       1.     The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact
               or law; or

       2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
               operations of the Agency.

Requests to reconsider, with supporting statement or brief, must be filed with the Office of
Federal Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days of receipt of another party’s timely request for
reconsideration in which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405;
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015). All requests and arguments must be submitted to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Complainant’s request may be submitted via regular mail to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, the request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by mail
within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604. The
agency’s request must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The request or opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party.

Failure to file within the time period will result in dismissal of your request for reconsideration
as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any
supporting documentation must be submitted with your request for reconsideration. The
Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                8                                    0120182117

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 5, 2020
Date
