             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Farah S., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                       (Southern Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020003304


                                 Agency No. 4G-780-0138-19

                                          DECISION

On May 2, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the
Agency’s April 1, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was on detail as Station
Manager of Lamar Park in Corpus Christi from her position as Postmaster, EAS-22, in
Pflugerville, Texas. Complainant’s immediate supervisor (S1) was the Manager Post Office
Operations (MPOO) for the Rio Grande District, assigned to Austin, Texas.

On August 22, 2019 (and later amended), Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that she
was subjected to discrimination and a hostile work environment by the Agency on the bases of
sex (female), age (YOB:1962), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2020003304

       1. While on detail two and one-half months prior to May 10, 2019, her supervisor (S1)
          placed confidential files in the hallway and made changes to her office and staff
          which subsequently forced her to end her detail assignment;

       2. On May 10, 2019, when Complainant returned from her detail assignment, she was
          placed on a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP);

       3. On May 3, 2019, May 10, 2019, and continuing, Complainant was spoken to in a
          derogatory and demeaning manner and was placed on notice on May 10, 2019;

       4. At the beginning of 2019, Complainant was not included in career development
          meetings and removed from Executive Leadership Development (ELD) projects;

       5. Prior to July 4, 2019, Complainant was not included in the instructions for the July 4th
          Holiday operations;

       6. On July 2, 2019, Complainant received late instructions to attend a Leadership
          Telecom;

       7. On May 10, 2019, Complainant was called “Paranoid;”

       8. On October 23, 2019, S1 singled Complainant out during a teleconference; and

       9. On unspecified dates, Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment by
          S1 when she copied Complainant’s male peers on email requests that she sent to S1,
          failed to help Complainant when Complainant requested S1’s assistance, and singled
          Complainant out for criticism.

In the beginning of 2019, Complainant stated she was placed on a sub-team of an EAS
Leadership Development (ELD) project. S1 bumped Complainant’s sub-team out of the ELD
team and added a non-ELD male Postmaster to do the project. Complainant alleged S1 took her
off the ELD team because S1 did not like her and preferred her male co-workers.

Complainant went on detail in March 2019 as Station Manager in Corpus Christi. During that
time, S1 came to work at the Pflugerville facility, where S1 made an office for herself in the
supervisor’s administrative office in the Pflugerville facility. Among other actions, Complainant
stated S1 emptied out the office placing the supervisor’s papers into a hamper, put her own items
into Complainant’s refrigerator, took the computer out of the Postmaster’s office and moved it to
where there was no local area network line, and disabled Complainant’s access to unit emails.
S1 also moved the passport sales area to a side office. These actions resulted in Complainant’s
operation and management of employees to be disrupted and her authority undermined.
Complainant averred she told S1 that she seemed to be punishing Complainant for going on
detail.
                                               3                                    2020003304

Complainant returned from her detail on May 10, 2019, and alleged that when she returned, S1
placed her on a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP). Complainant believed she was placed on
a PIP because S1 informed her that in February 2019, leadership questioned S1 for Pflugerville’s
poor performance. S1 then had Complainant attend weekly teleconferences for performance
issues. Complainant stated when she tried to find out why she was being placed on a PIP, S1 did
not give her any answers and said Complainant was being paranoid. Complainant’s coworker
(CW1), detailed as the Supervisor in the Pflugerville facility, stated he had gone with
Complainant to S1’s temporary office to discuss his status so Complainant could act accordingly.
He stated S1 replied that she did not want to deal with the issue and subsequently told
Complainant she was paranoid. Complainant asked S1 if she was a psychotherapist, and S1
informed Complainant she was being insubordinate.

On July 2, 2019, Complainant was notified at 11:35 a.m. that she was supposed to be on a
leadership conference that began at 11:00 a.m. and that she had to give a presentation.
Complainant averred S1 did not give Complainant advance notice of the presentation and
teleconference so that Complainant would look bad. Complainant informed the Acting Manager
Operations, that she had just been informed about the teleconference and did not have the link to
join.

Complainant alleged S1 also failed to give her instructions for July 4th operations so that her
operation would fail or burden her budget with extra hours. Had she been given the instructions
in advance; it would have allowed her to send her unit’s mail to a hub like her male peers.
Instead, she had to send her mail to the Austin Processing and Distribution Center.

During a teleconference regarding proposed changes for the return and leave times for rural
carriers, Complainant informed S1 there were contractual limitations on management’s ability to
set such times for rural carriers and that she had rural routes outside of the new proposed
requirements. S1 responded that Complainant needed to get the rural carriers at Pflugerville to
make their sortation times, so that Complainant could bring them in earlier. Complainant later
sent S1 an email regarding these proposed changes.

Complainant alleged that S1 gave preference to her younger, male peers because S1 did not treat
them like S1 treated her. S1 routinely failed to acknowledge Complainant as knowledgeable and
would single her out for criticism. S1 sent Complainant an email in August 7, 2019, to
Complainant and three other Postmasters regarding a customer complaint for each of their own
facilities. S1 also copied MPOO staff, and the postmasters for Leandler and Buda, Texas, even
though there were no case numbers assigned to their facilities. Complainant stated S1’s emails
where she carbon copied her male peers and her writing in all caps gave off the impression
Complainant was in trouble. Additionally, S1 often criticized her for not making her budget
work hours even though she explained to S1 that she can make earned work hours but not
budgeted work hours.
                                                4                                     2020003304

Complainant averred when she asked S1 for assistance, S1 would not respond, as was the case on
July 23, 2019, when she asked for help regarding a possible hostile work environment charge in
the office and on September 3, 2019, when she needed S1’s help with maintenance after she was
unable to get maintenance to remove or repair eight damaged cluster mailboxes.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a
final Agency decision (FAD). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a
FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to show that she was subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile work
environment as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Hostile Work Environment

To establish a claim of harassment, a complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).
Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

Therefore, to prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to
conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's
position would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove
that the conduct was taken because of her protected classes. Only if Complainant establishes
both of those elements, hostility and motive, will the question of Agency liability present itself.

Assuming arguendo that the alleged conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to create a
hostile work environment, Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s actions were based on
discriminatory or retaliatory animus. The record reflects that the alleged incidents were more
likely the result of routine supervision and general workplace disputes and tribulations.

S1 averred that performance at Pflugerville deteriorated greatly while Complainant had been
Postmaster, which is why she has had to quickly intervene due to the unit’s performance issues.
S1 stated her actions were done in an attempt to coach and mentor Complainant.
                                                5                                    2020003304

As a delivery service manager, S1 was required to ensure her units and operations maintained
their efficiencies and ensure Agency guidelines were met. S1 stated Complainant should expect
to be supervised by the person (S1) she reports to directly.

For example, with respect to S1 moving into the supervisor office and making changes to the
Pflugerville Post Office, S1 cleaned out the supervisor office so she could have an office when
she worked from Pflugerville. She stated she advised the supervisor to review the items she
placed into a cart and clean it up. S1 confirmed she made changes to the post office staff. The
Postmaster in Round Rock, Texas, stated S1 would move her office into post offices that were
having issues and struggling, and had previously done so in Round Rock and Georgetown. CW1
stated that he only saw cosmetic changes to the Pflugerville Post Office and there were no major
process changes that occurred.

Regarding Complainant’s assertion that she was placed on a PIP, the record does not contain any
evidence that Complainant was placed on a PIP. S1 stated she sent Complainant a form with
performance indicators for Complainant to return weekly, to try and improve the unit’s
performance. S1 explained it was a way to communicate weekly with Complainant and was not
part of a PIP.

Regarding S1 speaking to Complainant in a derogatory and demeaning manner, CW1 supported
Complainant’s assertions, stating that every week S1 speaks to Complainant in a derogatory and
demeaning manner on the weekly teleconference. However, CW1 did not provide any details or
examples. CW1 also confirmed S1 called Complainant paranoid, as detailed above. He later
told S1 he did not understand why she said that to Complainant and that there were other ways to
communicate with Complainant. S1 explained she and Complainant were discussing unit
performance when Complainant started to make hostile and snide remarks. S1 explained
Complainant was taking her statements out of context and told Complainant she was just being
paranoid. When S1 was unable to deescalate the situation, she asked Complainant to modify and
stop her continued insubordinate behavior. Since that encounter, S1 stated she has since tried out
different management styles with Complainant, with the goal of getting positive results from
Complainant.

With respect to S1 not including Complainant in career development meeting and removing her
from ELD projects, S1 stated no one was removed from the ELD team, and that everyone
remained on the team and received weekly telecom invites. S1 recalled Complainant failed to
attend most ELD telecoms and eventually stopped responding. S1 stated she asked Complainant
about getting involved with the ELD project, but that Complainant was unresponsive.

S1 denied excluding Complainant in the instructions for the July 4th operation. S1 explained the
instructions were given on a telecom where all of S1’s offices were advised to coordinate
together and hub from Round Rock, and Complainant failed to follow the instructions. She
noted Complainant has a habit of not paying attention to her calendar or invites and must be
regularly reminded to log into the weekly telecom meetings. S1 tried to notify her staff as early
as possible when information for scheduled telecoms was available.
                                                 6                                     2020003304

S1 did not recall the incident on July 2, 2019, where Complainant received late instructions to
attend and present at a leadership telecom. However, S1 explained it was rare to have one of her
units with poor performance have to report to the entire district. S1 did recall Complainant was
once asked to report out regarding her unit’s poor safety and accident scores.

With respect to the October 23, 2019 teleconference regarding the leave and return times for
rural carriers, S1 did not remember singling out Complainant for performance issues on the
teleconference.

S1 explained that, regarding Complainant’s request for assistance with a possible hostile work
environment charge in her post office, S1 contacted the Human Resources department who
advised Complainant she needed to handle the complaints in her office and address it
administratively. Regarding the September 3, 2019, maintenance request, S1 stated she has
helped Complainant address multiple maintenance issues and escalate them to a higher level.

The Commission concludes that Complainant has not shown she was subjected to a hostile work
environment. Moreover, to the extent Complainant claims that she was subjected to disparate
treatment, the Commission finds that, as discussed above, Complainant has not proffered any
evidence from which a reasonable fact finder could conclude that the Agency's explanation for
its actions was pretext for discrimination or reprisal. As a result, the Commission finds
Complainant was not subjected to a hostile work environment, discrimination or reprisal.

                                         CONCLUSION

After a review of the record in its entirety, including consideration of all statements submitted on
appeal, it is the decision of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision because the preponderance of the evidence of record does not establish
that discrimination occurred.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration.
                                                7                                     2020003304

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission.
                                                 8                                      2020003304

The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not
alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right
to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 7, 2021
Date
