             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Alma F., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs
                               (Veterans Health Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020003489

                                Hearing No. 416-2019-00037X

                              Agency No. 2003-0629-2017103033

                                          DECISION

On May 8, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 13, 2020, final agency decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented concerns whether the Agency subjected Complainant to discrimination when
it terminated Complainant’s part time position and allegedly failed to correct errors in her pay.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2020003489

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a part-time Staff
Physician, AD-15, at the Southeastern Louisiana VA Healthcare System (Southeastern Louisiana
VA) in New Orleans, Louisiana.

On August 12, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (Black) and sex (female) when:

       1. On April 28, 2017, the Chief of Staff terminated Complainant’s part-time
          employment via voicemail; and

       2. On May 5, 2017, Complainant became aware the Administrative Officer did not
          submit an overtime pay correction from February 5, 2011 through April 28, 2017.

On September 29, 2017, the Agency issued Complainant a Notice of Partial Acceptance,
accepting claim 1 for investigation. However, the Agency only partially accepted claim 2. The
Agency found that Complainant had failed to raise the events between February 2011 through
March 13, 2017, within the regulatory 45-day time limit. As such, the Agency advised
Complainant that it would only investigate claim 2 for the period from March 14, 2017 through
April 28, 2017.

The Agency then commenced an investigation into Complainant’s EEO complaint. During the
EEO investigation, the assigned EEO Investigator contacted Complainant to interview her for the
investigation; however, Complainant declined to be interviewed because she was scheduled to
undergo mediation to try to resolve her pay issues. When repeated attempts to interview
Complainant failed, the EEO investigator closed the investigation after only interviewing the
responsible management officials.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a
hearing.

On July 25, 2019, the AJ assigned to the matter informed the parties via email that the initial
conference would occur by telephone on August 19, 2019. In relevant part, the AJ sent the notice
to the email address that Complainant provided in her formal complaint. When Complainant
failed to appear at the initial conference, the AJ issued a show cause order via email on August
21, 2019, directing Complainant to show cause as to why sanctions should not be imposed. On
August 23, 2019, Complainant responded via email, stating that she did not receive the notice.
Complainant asked the AJ to call her to schedule the initial conference. The AJ ultimately
rejected Complainant’s explanation on the grounds that he had sent the notice to the email
address that Complainant previously provided. Consequently, the AJ remanded the complaint to
the Agency for the issuance of a final decision on the merits of the complaint.
                                                 3                                     2020003489

On April 13, 2020, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Due
to Complainant’s failure to provide an affidavit during the EEO investigation, the Agency relied
exclusively on the information gathered from the EEO Counselor’s Report. Having reviewed the
entire record, the Agency determined that the named responsible management officials had
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for taking the alleged actions. With regard to claim 1, the
Agency found that the Chief of Staff of the Southeastern Louisiana VA told Complainant that
her services were no longer needed because Complainant worked only 20 hours per week, and
the hospital system needed a physician who could perform different types of surgeries and had
the flexibility to work longer hours. For claim 2, the Agency noted that the Administrative
Officer averred that Complainant was paid for 20 hours per week, regardless of whether she
worked the full 20 hours. The Administrative Officer stated that for the weeks when
Complainant worked more than 20 hours, Complainant had to submit an additional timesheet
indicating the number of unscheduled hours worked so that Complainant’s timesheet could be
amended. The Administrative Officer emphasized that the problems with Complainant’s
timesheet were due to Complainant’s failure to properly request payment for the unscheduled
hours. Though the Agency attempted to determine whether Complainant could demonstrate
pretext, the Agency found that the limited record hindered Complainant’s ability to demonstrate
pretext. The Agency ultimately concluded that Complainant could not prove her allegations of
discrimination. The instant appeal followed.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant initially challenges the adequacy of the EEO investigation. In this
regard, Complainant maintains that she was never “notified about [the] investigation nor was
[she] asked to provide testimony.” Complainant further emphasizes that she had asked the AJ 2 to
call her whenever there was an incoming important email, as she did not check her email every
day due to her “dumb phone.” Complainant asserts that due to the AJ’s failure to call her, she did
not check her email until the day after the initial conference. Complainant further asserts that the
initial conference should have been scheduled via certified mail, not by email.

As for the merits of the Complainant, Complainant asserts that the Chief of Staff never told her
that the reason for her termination was due to the Agency’s need for a physician who could work
longer and more flexible hours and perform different types of surgeries. To the contrary,
Complainant maintains that she had always asked for more hours and had even assisted in
training her first level supervisor on robotic surgery. Complainant reasons that her supervisor
wanted to replace her so that he could hire a female faculty member from Tulane University
whom he perceived as subservient to him.

As for claim 2, Complainant asserts that the Administrative Officer was not telling the truth
when he stated that Complainant had failed to turn in her corrected timesheets.


2
  Complainant’s appellate brief states that the “EEOC Counselor” failed to notify her about the
initial conference; however, the probative evidence suggests that Complainant was referring to
the “AJ.”
                                               4                                    2020003489

In this regard, Complainant maintains that during the week of October 16, 2017, she and the
Administrative Officer reviewed all of her timesheets, and they both signed “off on all of them.”
Though Complainant maintains that the Administrative Officer was not telling the truth,
Complainant emphasizes that she never accused the Administrative Officer of discrimination. 3

The Agency opposes the appeal and requests that the Commission affirm its final decision.

                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Dismissal of Hearing Request

Preliminarily, we shall address the AJ’s decision to dismiss Complainant’s hearing request as a
sanction for Complainant’s failure to attend the initial conference. As discussed above,
Complainant asserts on appeal that she did not receive the AJ’s email until the day after the
initial conference because the AJ failed to call her and did not send notice of the initial
conference via certified mail.

As a general matter, we note that the Commission affords its AJs broad discretion to conduct
hearings, manage discovery, and determine whether to admit evidence, issue sanctions or permit
or compel the testimony of witnesses. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109. Here, the record reflects that
the AJ notified Complainant on July 25, 2019 via email that the initial conference would occur
on August 19, 2019; however, Complainant allegedly did not check her email until August 20,
2019, as her “dumb phone” limited her ability to check her email account.

Having reviewed the record, we find that the AJ did not abuse her discretion in dismissing the
hearing request, as we agree with the AJ that Complainant’s professed inability to regularly
check her email due to her “dumb phone” is insufficient to constitute good cause for missing the
initial hearing conference.



3
  Complainant states the following: “You also inferred that I was claiming discrimination against
[the Administrative Officer]. I never did this.” See Complainant’s appellate brief at 1.
                                                5                                     2020003489

We note that the Commission has previously upheld an AJ’s dismissal of a hearing request for
failure to attend a scheduled initial conference. See Cornell S. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120180632 (Sept. 27, 2019) (affirming the AJ’s dismissal of complainant’s hearing request
for failure to attend the initial conference). To the extent Complainant believes that the AJ
improperly served her by email, we acknowledge that our complaint processing regulations at 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 do not expressly address or define service by electronic mail; however, the
record here reflects that Complainant provided her email address as one method of contacting
her. Had Complainant wished to receive only paper mailings, Complainant should have updated
her contact information to reflect her preference. Alisia M. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120182778 (Feb. 26, 2019) (finding that AJ did not abuse her discretion in
dismissing the hearing request for failure to attend initial conference, as the record showed that
complainant did not receive notice of the initial conference due to her failure to update her
contact information). Given the facts in this case, we find the dismissal of Complainant’s hearing
request to be fully within the AJ’s discretion.

In reaching this conclusion, we acknowledge that the Commission has previously issued
decisions finding the dismissal of a hearing request for failure to attend an initial conference to
be too harsh of a sanction; however, we note that in those cases, the Commission found
extenuating circumstances that made the imposition of such a sanction unwarranted given the
facts in the case. See, e.g., Georgianne B. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120181591
(Feb. 27, 2020) (finding dismissal of hearing request for missing initial conference to be
inappropriate, where the record showed that the case had been reassigned to a new AJ, and the
parties were not notified of the reassignment). We find such extenuating circumstances to be
absent in this case.

EEO Investigation

We are also disinclined to find the EEO investigation to be inadequate, particularly in light of
Complainant’s own failure to submit an affidavit. While we are mindful of Complainant’s
contention that the EEO Investigator never asked her to provide an affidavit, we find that her
contention is contradicted by emails between the EEO Investigator and Complainant, which
show that Complainant initially agreed to be interviewed on March 5, 2018, but ultimately did
not show. ROI at 97-98. Though the interview was rescheduled to March 7, 2018, Complainant
again failed to appear. Id. at 101. We find that these records persuasively establish that
Complainant was not denied the opportunity to provide an affidavit, and that the Agency’s
failure to obtain an affidavit was based solely on Complainant’s failure to provide one. Given
these circumstances, we will not remand this matter for either a hearing or a supplemental
investigation. See McCombs v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A52069 (Apr. 14, 2005)
(finding investigation to be adequate despite the lack of an affidavit from complainant, as the
record showed that complainant failed to provide an affidavit), req. for recons. den. EEOC
Request No. 05A60427 (Aug. 22, 2006).
                                                6                                     2020003489

Disparate Treatment

We turn now to the merits of the complaint, concerning Complainant’s allegation that the
Agency engaged in discrimination when the Chief of Staff terminated her employment via
voicemail and when the Administrative officer failed to submit overtime pay corrections, thereby
affecting her pay.

For Complainant to prevail in a claim of disparate treatment, she must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof
of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas,
411 U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Aff. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253
(1981). Complainant must ultimately prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
agency’s explanation is pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc.,
530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); and St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993);
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

Assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on
race and sex, we find that the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
terminating Complainant’s part time position. As reflected in the record, the Chief of Staff
terminated Complainant’s appointment because the Agency needed a physician who could work
longer, more flexible hours, and perform more types of surgeries. With regard to Complainant’s
pay, the Administrative Officer maintained that he did in fact submit timecard corrections for
Complainant.

In arguing pretext, Complainant disputes the Agency’s explanation and maintains on appeal that
she had requested more hours and was even more qualified than her supervisor (Chief of
Gynecologic Services). She reasons that the Agency terminated her so that her supervisor could
hire a subservient female physician to replace her. Complainant also disputes the Administrative
Officer’s claim that he submitted timecard corrections; however, she emphasizes that she never
accused the Administrative Officer of discrimination.

After careful consideration of the evidence of record, we find no persuasive evidence that the
Agency’s articulated reasons were pretext for discrimination. The Commission has long held that
agencies have broad discretion to set policies and carry out personnel decisions and should not
be second-guessed by the reviewing authority absent evidence of unlawful motivation. Vanek v.
Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05940906 (Jan. 16, 1997). Given the facts in this case,
we find that Complainant has failed to show by the preponderant evidence that she was subjected
to discrimination, as the record clearly reflects that the Agency had legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for its action for terminated Complainant’s employment.
                                                  7                                  2020003489

We are unpersuaded by Complainant’s evidence of pretext, as we find Complainant’s attempts to
rebut the Agency’s explanation to be speculative and unsupported by the record. Consequently,
we conclude that Complainant cannot prevail on claim 1. As for claim 2, even if we assume
arguendo that the Administrative Officer was not telling the truth, we still find that Complainant
cannot prevail on her claim, given her assertion that she has never accused the Administrative
Officer of discrimination.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                8                                     2020003489

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 2, 2021
Date
