             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Erick K., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                       (Western Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020001564

                                 Agency No. 4E-890-0042-18

                                          DECISION

On November 25, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 23, 2019, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission REVERSES the Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented on appeal is whether the preponderance of the evidence in the record
establishes that Complainant was subjected to discrimination based on national origin, color,
disability, age, and/or reprisal.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Q7-01 City Carrier
at the Agency’s Spring Valley Station facility in Las Vegas, Nevada. Complainant is Hispanic


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2020001564

and Brown, and he was born in December 1953. Complainant identified his disability as back
and leg injuries from falling at work on March 31, 2017. Complainant stated that management
was aware that he engaged in protected activity in May 2018 when he requested to meet with his
representative to initiate the instant EEO complaint.

Complainant stated that his medical restrictions were as follows: no driving, no climbing, no
kneeling, no bending, no twisting, limited standing, limited walking, limited sitting, no lifting
over 15 pounds, and no pushing or pulling over 40 pounds. According to Complainant, starting
on May 15, 2017, his medical restrictions were accommodated, and he was offered eight hours of
work per day.

Complainant stated that, beginning on July 12, 2017, the Station Manager (S1) stopped
accommodating his medical restrictions. Complainant alleged that, on July 12, 2017, S1 told him
that “she could not waste her Clerk budget on limited duty Carriers.” Report of Investigation
(ROI) at 150. According to Complainant, S1 only gave him one hour and 12 minutes of work per
day, casing his route, then she would send him home. Complainant stated that other tasks that he
could perform within his restrictions were separating undeliverable bulk business mail (UBBM),
assisting with the “Dutch door,” scanning returned parcels, and writing up second notices.
Complainant averred that S1 also directed the other supervisors not to give Complainant
additional work. Complainant stated that S1 subsequently told him that she did not need him to
case his route and did not offer him any work.

Complainant elected to participate in alternative dispute resolution in lieu of traditional EEO
counseling for the instant complaint. According to Complainant, S1 expressed that she was angry
that she had to participate in the mediation of Complainant’s EEO matter.

On August 1, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of race (Hispanic), 2 color (Brown), disability (physical), age (born in
December 1953), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, starting on April 23, 2018,
management failed to accommodate him based on his medical restrictions.

The Agency initially dismissed Complainant’s complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1)
for failure to state a claim as a collateral attack on the grievance process. On appeal, we found
that Complainant was alleging that the Agency was refusing to accommodate his disability with
eight hours of work per day and remanded the matter for further processing. Erick K. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2019000871 (Feb. 12, 2019).

During the investigation of the complaint, the EEO Investigator (E1) asked Complainant to
complete and sign a Privacy Act Authorization and Waiver that would allow the Agency and the
Department of Labor’s Office of Workers Compensation Programs to disclose information
regarding Complainant’s workers compensation claims.


2
 Although Complainant designated his race as “Hispanic,” the Commission recognizes this term
as an indication of national origin rather than race.
                                                   3                                      2020001564

On March 10, 2019, Complainant’s non-attorney representative emailed E1, stating that,
although Complainant was electing not to sign the Privacy Act Authorization and Waiver,
Complainant “will provide documents requested that are directly relevant to his case.” ROI at
255. There is no indication in the record that E1 requested any documents from Complainant or
his representative.

On March 25, 2019, E1 emailed S1 regarding the investigation of Complainant’s EEO
complaint, stating that she had attempted to contact S1 numerous times by phone and had been
unable to reach her. ROI at 168. On March 26, 2019, E1 emailed S1 an investigative affidavit,
instructions for completing the affidavit, a cover letter, a litigation hold notice, and a certification
form, and E1 asked S1 to return the signed and dated affidavit and forms within 14 calendar days
of receipt. ROI at 171. At 9:41 p.m. on March 26, 2019, E1 received a “read receipt” indicating
that S1 had opened the email she sent earlier that day. ROI at 172.

When S1 did not return the affidavit or respond to further emails and calls from E1, E1 contacted
the Las Vegas District Human Resources Manager (HR1) on May 14, 2019. On May 15, 2019,
HR1 emailed E1, stating, “[S1] is currently not at work. I would not recommend sending her the
affidavit to her house due to the nature of her absence.” ROI at 178. On June 12, 2019, E1
mailed an affidavit request to S1’s address of record by Priority Mail. The record contains
redacted tracking information showing that a package was delivered on June 14, 2019. ROI at
184. 3

E1 interviewed three management officials. An individual who stated that, during the time of
events giving rise to the instant complaint, he was the Manager, Customer Service Operations
above S1 in the chain of command (S2) repeatedly answered questions by stating, “Have no idea
who this person [Complainant] is to even make a statement.” ROI at 186-91. A Supervisor,
Customer Service (S3) stated that, although he had supervised Complainant, he was not
Complainant’s supervisor during the relevant timeframe. Another Supervisor, Customer Service
(S4) stated that she did supervise Complainant during the relevant timeframe.


3
   We remind the Agency that federal employees have an obligation to comply with EEO
investigations. EEOC Regulations provide that the Agency and any employee of a federal agency
shall produce such evidence as the investigator deems necessary. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(c)(1).
The regulations further provide that, when the Agency or its employees “fail without good cause
shown to respond fully and in timely fashion” to requests for documents, affidavits, the
attendance of witnesses, or other evidence “the investigator may note in the investigative record
that the decisionmaker should, or the Commission on appeal, may in appropriate circumstances:
(i) draw an adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony of the requested
witness would have reflected unfavorably on the party refusing to provide the requested
information; (ii) consider the matters to which the requested information or testimony pertains to
be established in favor of the opposing party; (iii) exclude other evidence offered by the party
failing to produce the requested information or witness; (iv) issue a decision fully or partially in
favor of the opposing party; or (v) take such other actions as it deems appropriate.” 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108(c)(3).
                                                 4                                     2020001564

However, when asked about Complainant’s medical condition and medical restrictions, S4
responded, “I only knew he was only allowed to work a certain number of hours when they
transferred him from another station to Spring Valley.” ROI at 202. S4 stated that she had not
seen any medical documentation and that she was not aware of Complainant’s restrictions.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final decision. In
his request for a final decision, Complainant noted that the investigation of his complaint was
incomplete and inadequate and stated that the Agency could contact him or his non-attorney
representative if they needed any documents that were not requested by E1. 4

In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The Agency found that, in the absence of any medical
documentation, Complainant had not established that he was an individual with a disability under
the Rehabilitation Act.

The instant appeal followed. Neither party submitted a statement or brief on appeal.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).


Complainant alleged that he was denied a reasonable accommodation. In order to establish that
Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: (1) he is an
individual with a disability; (2) he is a qualified individual with a disability; and (3) the Agency
failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, No. 915.002
(Oct. 17, 2002).


4
  It is unclear whether Complainant requested a final decision because of the inadequacy of the
record. Although the Agency is responsible for developing an appropriate and impartial factual
record, we note that the hearing process is also part of the investigative process and that EEOC
AJs oversee the development of the record. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b); 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109.
                                                 5                                      2020001564

An agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical and mental
limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the agency can show that
accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p). “The term
“qualified,” with respect to an individual with a disability, means that the individual satisfies the
requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment
position such individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can
perform the essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).

Complainant stated that he had a 15-pound lifting restriction. Although there is no supporting
medical documentation in the record, Complainant’s assertion that he had a 15-pound lifting
restriction is unrebutted in the record. Based on Commission precedent, a 15-pound lifting
restriction renders Complainant an individual with a disability under the Rehabilitation Act. See
Bill A. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120131989 (Oct. 26, 2016) (Complainant
restricted from stooping/bending and lifting more than 15 pounds is an individual with a
disability). Accordingly, we conclude that Complainant is an individual with a disability.

We further find that Complainant is a qualified individual with a disability. Complainant stated
that he was accommodated with eight hours of work that he was capable of performing within
his medical restrictions until July 12, 2017.

Complainant alleged that, starting on July 12, 2017, S1 only gave him one hour and 12 minutes
of work per day. Although she did not know the reason he was given limited work hours, S4’s
statement corroborates that Complainant was given a limited number of hours to work. We find
that, when the Agency stopped giving Complainant eight hours of work per day, the Agency
denied Complainant a reasonable accommodation.

The Agency has not established that accommodating Complainant with eight hours of work per
day constituted undue hardship. Further, the Agency has failed to provide any legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. 5 The record does not contain any information about
why all tasks other than casing his route were suddenly taken away from Complainant. S2, S3,
and S4 provided investigative affidavits, but they were unable to explain why Complainant was
only given one hour and 12 minutes of work per day. Despite multiple contact attempts by E1,
S1 did not provide an investigative affidavit. The Agency is therefore liable for its failure to
accommodate Complainant. Moreover, given the lack of explanation as to why Complainant’s
hours were suddenly reduced and he was no longer being accommodated, we find that the
agency failed to act in good faith and therefore compensatory damages are awardable.




5
 Moreover, S1’s alleged statement that “she could not waste her Clerk budget on limited duty
Carriers” and her alleged anger at having to participate in the mediation of Complainant’s EEO
complaint suggests that she may have been motivated by discriminatory and/or retaliatory
animus.
                                               6                                    2020001564

Based on our finding that Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation for his
disability, we need not analyze whether Complainant established discrimination regarding the
other raised bases, as no further remedial relief would stem from such a finding.

                                       CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we REVERSE the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination and REMAND the matter for further processing in accordance with the ORDER
below.

                                           ORDER

The Agency is ORDERED to take the following remedial action:

       1.     To the extent it has not done so already, the Agency shall immediately engage in
              the interactive process in order to provide Complainant with an effective
              reasonable accommodation to perform the essential duties of his position.
       2.     Within 60 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
              restore all leave taken by Complainant because of its failure to provide him with a
              reasonable accommodation beginning on July 12, 2017.
       3.     Within 60 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
              determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with interest, and other benefits
              due Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501. Complainant shall cooperate
              in the Agency's efforts to compute the amount of back pay and benefits due and
              shall provide all relevant information requested by the Agency. If there is a
              dispute regarding the exact amount of back pay and/or benefits, the Agency shall
              issue a check to Complainant for the undisputed amount within 60 calendar days
              of the date the Agency determines the amount it believes to be due. Complainant
              may petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute. The
              petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance
              Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation of the
              Commission's Decision.”
              The Agency shall also pay compensation for the adverse tax consequences of
              receiving back pay as a lump sum. Complainant has the burden of establishing the
              amount of increased tax liability, if any. Once the Agency has calculated the
              proper amount of back pay, Complainant shall be given the opportunity to present
              the Agency with evidence regarding the adverse tax consequences, if any, for
              which Complainant shall then be compensated.
                                                 7                                       2020001564

       4.     Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
              conduct a supplemental investigation with respect to Complainant's claim of
              compensatory damages. The Agency shall allow Complainant to present evidence
              in support of her compensatory damages claim. See Carle v. Dep't of the Navy,
              EEOC No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993). Complainant shall cooperate with the
              Agency in this regard. The Agency shall issue a final decision addressing the
              issues of compensatory damages no later than 30 days after the completion of the
              investigation.
       5.     Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
              provide a minimum of eight hours of in-person or interactive training to S1, S2,
              S3, and S4. The training shall address the Agency’s obligations under the
              Rehabilitation Act with respect to reasonable accommodation, as well as the
              obligation of federal employees to comply with EEO investigations.
       6.     Within 60 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
              consider taking appropriate disciplinary action against S1. If the Agency decides
              to take disciplinary action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides
              not to take disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to
              impose discipline. If S1 has left the Agency's employment, then the Agency shall
              furnish documentation of her departure date.
       7.     Within 30 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall post a
              notice in accordance with the statement entitled “Posting Order.”
The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Spring Valley Station facility in Las Vegas, Nevada copies
of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered,
defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the
Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's
Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period.
                                                8                                     2020001564

The report must be in digital format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               9                                    2020001564

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 10                                     2020001564

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 8, 2021
Date
