             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Washington, DC 20507


                                          Dalton E., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Merrick B. Garland,
                                       Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                                  (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020001456

                                 Agency No. BOP-2018-0511

                                          DECISION

On December 12, 2019, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 22 2019 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS in part and REVERSES in part, the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Correctional Officer
(CO), GS-0007-08, at the Agency’s Federal Correctional Complex (FCC) in Pollock, Louisiana.

Complainant applied for the position of Maintenance Worker Supervisor under Vacancy
Announcement No. POL-2018-0013, at FCC Pollock. Complainant stated he had applied to
around 31 positions since 2006 and had made the best qualified list most of the time. Twelve of
those applications were for Maintenance Worker Supervisor positions in Facilities.

The Complex Warden for FCC Pollock served as the Selecting Official (SO) for the vacancy at
issue. On March 9, 2018, Complainant learned he was not selected for the Maintenance Worker
Supervisor position via an office email announcement.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2020001464

The record indicates that the Selectee for the position was 36 years old at the time of the
selection. Twenty candidates, including Selectee and Complainant, made the Best Qualified List
and were listed on the merit promotion certificate sent to SO for his consideration.

SO attested that he chose the Selectee because he thought he was the best qualified for the
position. He explained that he chose Selectee from the Best Qualified List and that everyone on
the Best Qualified List was equally qualified. SO stated he received input from the Associate
Warden regarding who should be selected for the position, however he did not give any
information or details of the input he received.

Complainant explained that he believed his age was a factor in his non-selection because he had
spoken with seven different men that had been hired in General Maintenance since 2006, and
none of them were over 40 years old, the oldest candidate hired being 37 years old. 2
Complainant averred that his age can be inferred from his application because his resume states
that he graduated high school in May 1983.

In the past, Complainant had received three Outstanding and two Exceed ratings for five specific
elements in which he received ratings on his quarterly log entries: (1) Supervises inmates; (2)
Inspects, operates and controls equipment; (3) Controls contraband; (4) Follows security
procedures; and (5) Communication. His rater for his performance evaluation for the June and
September 2018 quarterly log entries at issue was the Lieutenant and one of Complainant’s
immediate supervisors (S1). The first time S1 rated Complainant was for the first quarter ending
in June 2018. The first quarter log entry period was from April – June 2018 and the second
quarter log entry period from July – September 2018.

S1 sent Complainant an email on May 12, 2018, informing him that he would be completing his
evaluation for the entire year and that communication was very important since S1 would not be
working with Complainant directly. He stated he did not give out “Outstanding” ratings easily
and it needed to be earned. If Complainant wanted S1 to consider something for his evaluation,
Complainant needed to send it to S1. Complainant sent S1 an email explaining, among other
things, how he processed visitors and monitored inmates to prevent the passing of contraband.
S1 stated Complainant never informed S1 of any specific contraband that he had found or of any
extraordinary circumstances where Complainant was involved.

When Complainant asked S1 about his ratings, S1 suggested that he needed to be more seen and
or bid for a post besides Visitation as a way to find contraband and supervise more inmates
because contraband generally does not come through Visitation and he could search inmates and
their housing.




2
  Complainant explained that “General Maintenance” is the term commonly used for
“Maintenance Worker Supervisor.”
                                               3                                   2020001464

Complainant reached out to his second-level supervisor (S2), a Deputy Captain at FCC Pollock,
about his rating from S1. Complainant commented to S2 that he was suspicious that he received
a lower rating from previous years after he filed an EEO complaint. S2 attested there was no
information to suggest S1 knew of Complainant filing an EEO complaint during the rating
period. S1 had completed the first and second quarter log entries rating Complainant’s
performance prior to having any knowledge about Complainant’s EEO Complaint. Complainant
informed S1 about his EEO complaint in a conversation regarding S1’s lower first and second
quarter ratings of Complainant’s performance.

S2 stated neither the visibility of staff or assignment posts are set factors in the evaluation
process, however, certain post assignments can give staff the ability to develop and become more
effective within specific standards.

On June 4, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging the Agency discriminated
against him on the basis of age (53) when:

       1) On March 9, 2018, Complainant became aware that he was not selected for the
          Maintenance Worker Supervisor position under Vacancy Announcement No. POL-
          2018-0013. Complainant alleged that he had applied for this position on numerous
          occasions and had made the Best-Qualified list most times.

On September 24, 2018, Complainant amended his complaint, alleging the Agency subjected
him to reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       2) In June and September 2018, his first and second quarter evaluations dropped.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge. Complainant requested a final Agency decision (FAD). In accordance
with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant, through his representative, contends the Agency failed to meet its
burden of production as it did not articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
Complainant’s non-selection. Complainant argues the Agency failed to provide a specific, clear,
and individualized explanation for Complainant’s non-selection that would have allowed him the
opportunity to prove the Agency’s non-selection was discriminatory.
                                                 4                                     2020001464

Since the Agency failed to meet its burden, the Complainant requests the Commission reverse
the FAD and find that the Agency discriminated against Complainant based on age when it failed
to select him for the Maintenance Worker Supervisor position. 3

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of
a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas,
411 U.S. at 802 n. 13. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately
prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's
explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S.
133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Hon. Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Tx. Dep’t of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

Claim 1

Complainant may establish a prima facie case of discrimination in the non-selection context by
showing that: (1) he is a member of a protected class; (2) he was qualified for the position; (3) he
was not selected for the position; and (4) he was accorded treatment different from that given to
persons otherwise similarly situated who are not members of his protected group, or in the case
of age, who are considerably younger than him. Obas v. Dep't of Justice, EEOC Appeal No.
01A04389 (May 16, 2002); Williams v. Dep't of Educ., EEOC Request No. 05970561 (Aug. 6,
1998).



3
  Complainant’s argument on appeal only addresses the non-selection in Claim 1. No additional
arguments or evidence were submitted regarding Claim 2.
                                                  5                                      2020001464

Complainant may also set forth evidence of acts from which, if otherwise unexplained, an
inference of discrimination can be drawn. Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567,
576 (1978).

In the instant case, the Commission agrees with the Agency that Complainant established a
prima facie case of discrimination based on his age. There is no dispute that Complainant
established prongs (1) - (4). Once a complainant has established a prima facie case, the burden
then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex.
Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253. The Supreme Court has described this
burden as being met “if the [agency's] evidence raises a genuine issue of fact as to whether it
discriminated against the [complainant],” and that “[t]o accomplish this, the [agency] must
clearly set forth, through the introduction of admissible evidence, the reasons for the
[complainant's] rejection.” Id. at 254-55. Moreover, the agency must “frame the factual issue
with sufficient clarity so that the [complainant] will have a full and fair opportunity to
demonstrate pretext,” with the adequacy of its evidence “evaluated by the extent to which it
fulfill[ed] these functions.” Id. at 255-56. The burden is incumbent upon the agency to respond
to a complainant's prima facie case with a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions is a
burden of production, not persuasion. Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142. While the agency's burden of
production is not onerous, it must nevertheless provide a specific, clear, and individualized
explanation for the treatment accorded a complainant. Lorenzo v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Request
No. 05950931 (Nov. 6, 1997); see also Woodward v. Dep't of Labor, EEOC Appeal No.
01970288 (Feb. 1, 2000) (agency failed to meet its burden of production with sufficient
particularity when the selecting official's affidavit stated that the selectee was better qualified for
the position because of her background, her superior experience in the field of interest, and her
interview responses showing she had the perspective and attitude toward the position that would
ensure success in the office).

Upon review of the record, we find that the Agency failed to meet its burden of articulating a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant's non-selection. Specifically, we find that
SO failed to provide a specific, clear, and individualized explanation for Complainant's non-
selection for the position at issue. As detailed above, SO stated that he chose the Selectee
because he thought they were the best qualified for the position. SO only explained that he chose
Selectee from the Best Qualified List and that everyone on the Best Qualified List was equally
qualified. We find that SO’s affidavit testimony is not sufficiently particularized or specific to
permit Complainant to mount an evidentiary challenge to SO’s only explanation that he thought
the Selectee was the best qualified for the position. 4



4
  The Agency found SO’s answers were so vague and inadequate that a Memorandum was
submitted along with the FAD, finding SO failed to provide specific information as to why he
chose Selectee for the Maintenance Worker Supervisor position. The Memorandum states,
“Such terse, conclusory explanations are unacceptable in a selection case…[the Agency’s]
management officials must fully cooperate in EEO investigations by providing specific, detailed
answers regarding the reasons for their selection decisions.”
                                                6                                    2020001464

SO does not provide any examples or specifics as to why he thought Selectee was better
qualified or provide evidence to support his conclusion. Due to SO’s lack of specific details, the
Commission finds the Agency’s explanations are insufficient to afford Complainant a
meaningful opportunity to prove the explanations to be false.

Based on the above, we find that the Agency failed to articulate a specific, clear, and
individualized explanation for Complainant's non-selection, and consequently, Complainant was
denied a fair opportunity to demonstrate pretext. See Stewart v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Request No. 0520070124 (Nov. 14, 2011); Garcia v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No.
01A32050 (Jan. 7, 2005), req. for recon. den'd, EEOC Request No. 05A50685 (Apr. 26, 2005);
Young v. Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05940517 (Oct. 13, 1995). Thus, the
Agency failed to rebut the inference of discrimination, which was created when Complainant
established a prima facie case of age discrimination, by not articulating a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Therefore, we find that the Agency discriminated
against Complainant based on his age when it did not select him for the position of Maintenance
Worker Supervisor, Vacancy Announcement Number POL-2018, 0013.

Claim 2

Complainant can establish a prima facie case of reprisal discrimination by presenting facts that,
if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec.
Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996) (citing McDonnell Douglas Corp. v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802 (1973)). Specifically, in a reprisal claim, and in accordance with the
burdens set forth in McDonnell Douglas, Hochstadt v. Worcester Foundation for Experimental
Biology, 425 F. Supp. 318,324 (D. Mass.), aff'd, 545 F.2d 222 (1st Cir. 1976), and Coffman v.
Dep't of Veteran Affairs, EEOC Request No. 05960473(Nov. 20, 1997), a complainant may
establish a prima facie case of reprisal by showing that: (1) he or she engaged in a protected
activity; (2) the agency was aware of the protected activity; (3) subsequently, he or she was
subjected to adverse treatment by the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected
activity and the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Dep't of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No.
01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of reprisal for filing the
current complaint, we find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
their actions. S1 explained that he was unable to give Complainant “Outstanding” ratings for the
elements where Complainant failed to provide S1 with enough information of his
accomplishments during the quarters, such as finding contraband. S1 had informed Complainant
that he did not give “Outstanding” ratings easily and that he needed Complainant to inform him
of his accomplishments during the quarters so he could rate him accurately. Aside from
Complainant’s allegations that S1’s ratings were motivated by reprisal because Complainant
believed he deserved higher ratings since other supervisors had previously given him higher
ratings, the record evidence does not show that S1’s explanations for his actions were pretext for
reprisal.
                                                7                                     2020001464

We find that Complainant has not proffered any evidence from which a reasonable fact finder
could conclude that the Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for reprisal. As a result,
the Commission finds Complainant was not subjected to reprisal as to this claim.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding that Complainant
did not establish that he was subjected to reprisal as alleged with respect to the allegation in
Claim 2. We REVERSE the Agency’s final decision finding that Complainant was not subjected
to age discrimination with respect to Claim 1, and REMAND this matter to the Agency for
further action in accordance with the following Order.

                                        ORDER (D0617)

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial action:

   1. Within 60 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall issue a
      written offer to Complainant for the position of Maintenance Worker Supervisor
      announced under Vacancy Announcement No. POL-2018-0013 or a substantially
      equivalent position, retroactive to the date of Complainant's non-selection. The Agency's
      written offer shall provide Complainant with fifteen (15) days from receipt of the offer to
      notify the Agency whether he accepts or rejects the position. Failure to respond within
      the 15-day time limit shall be construed as rejection. Any back pay liability shall cease to
      accrue with either the actual placement of Complainant into the position or with the date
      the offer was declined.

   2. The Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with interest, and other
      benefits due the Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501, no later than 60 calendar
      days from the date this decision is issued. Complainant shall cooperate in the Agency's
      efforts to compute the amount of back pay and benefits due and shall provide all relevant
      information requested by the Agency. If there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of
      back pay and/or benefits, the Agency shall issue a check to the Complainant for the
      undisputed amount within 60 calendar days of the date the Agency determines the
      amount it believes to be due. Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification
      of the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with
      the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled
      "Implementation of the Commission's Decision."

   3. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide a
      minimum of eight hours of in-person or interactive training to the management official
      identified as the selecting official (SO) particularly regarding age discrimination under
      the ADEA.
                                                 8                                      2020001464

   4. Within 60 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall consider taking
      disciplinary action against the management official identified as the selecting official
      (SO). The Commission does not consider training to be disciplinary action. The Agency
      shall report its decision to the Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides to take
      disciplinary action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take
      disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline.
      If the responsible management official has left the Agency's employ, the Agency shall
      furnish documentation of his departure date.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Federal Correctional Complex (FCC) facility in Pollock,
Louisiana copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's
duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for
60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted
to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the
Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The
report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
                                                9                                     2020001464

The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the
Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29
C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has
the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph
below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil
action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline
stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil
action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                               10                                   2020001464

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 11                                     2020001464

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 17, 2021
Date
