             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                        Georgianne B., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Thomas J. Vilsack,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of Agriculture
                                    (Farm Service Agency),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020001175

                                 Agency No. FSA-2019-00330

                                          DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s October 11, 2019, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Litigation
Specialist, GS-13, at the Agency’s Human Resources Division, on the Administrative Hearings
Conflict Management Staff, in Washington, DC.

On February 11, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her based on color (black) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
when, since December 11, 2018, management has not provided Complainant with her Fiscal
Year (FY) 2018 Annual Performance Evaluation and accompanying performance award, and
management refused to meet with her to discuss her performance rating.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2020001175

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative
Judge. Complainant requested a final Agency decision without a hearing.

In its final decision, the Agency found that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination or retaliation as alleged. The Agency concluded that it had
articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its action—namely, that the Agency’s
Office of General Counsel (OGC) requested Complainant’s second-level supervisor, Director of
Human Resources (Director), to hold Complainant’s FY2018 appraisal in abeyance due to an
OGC investigation into Complainant’s performance. The final Agency decision further
concluded that Complainant failed to present sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the
Agency’s stated reason was pretextual. The instant appeal followed.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Assuming Complainant established a prima face case of discrimination and retaliation, we find
that the Agency provided a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its action. While the record
does not support Director’s contention that he was explicitly ordered by OGC to withhold
Complainant’s FY2018 performance appraisal, there is evidence that OGC had concerns about
Complainant’s then-recent performance and informed Director of these concerns. The record
shows that the issue was elevated to OGC during the relevant time period. Specifically, an OGC
attorney voiced concerns that in one of Complainant’s cases, Complainant had failed to comply
with a discovery order. OGC’s Deputy General Counsel, Civil Rights, Labor & Employment
Law Division, subsequently emailed several people in Complainant’s office, including Director,
about the issue, saying it was “unacceptable” and “deeply troubling,” and that someone from
OGC “will be in touch” to “discuss this issue.”

Therefore, even if OGC did not directly order Director to hold Complainant’s performance
appraisal in abeyance, OGC clearly had concerns regarding Complainant’s work performance
and indicated to Director that it planned to review the matter. This is a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason to withhold Complainant’s performance appraisal. See, e.g.,
Demarcus I. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120162610 (May 16, 2018)
(Commission found that postponing a complainant’s performance appraisal pending an
investigation into his involvement with “contracting discrepancies” was a legitimate,
                                               3                                    2020001175

nondiscriminatory reason for the Agency’s action), request for reconsideration denied, EEOC
Request No. 0520180462 (Sept. 12, 2018). We also find that Complainant failed to provide
persuasive evidence of pretext or otherwise establish that discriminatory or retaliatory animus
played a role in this matter. See McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973);
Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981); Reeves v. Sanderson
Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); and St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S.
502, 519 (1993).

Based on the foregoing, we find that Complainant has failed to show that the Agency’s actions
were motivated by discrimination as she alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Upon careful review of the evidence of record, including the parties’ arguments on appeal, we
conclude that the Agency correctly determined that the preponderance of the evidence did not
establish that Complainant was discriminated against by the Agency. Accordingly, we AFFIRM
the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507.
                                                4                                     2020001175

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed
timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing
period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  5                                     2020001175

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 3, 2021
Date
