             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                         Scott K., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                      Marcia L. Fudge,
                                        Secretary,
                       Department of Housing and Urban Development,
                                         Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020003413

                                Agency No. HUD-00108-2019

                                         DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated March 18, 2020, finding no discrimination
concerning his complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §621 et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Healthcare Account
Executive, GS-12, at the Agency’s Office of Healthcare Programs in Los Angeles, California.

On June 12, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination and a hostile
work environment based on sex (male), race (Asian), national origin (China), age (over 40), and
in reprisal for prior EEO activity when:

    A. On April 8, 2019, he received a written admonishment;



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2020003413

   B. On March 25, 2019, he was accused of raising his voice, mistreating, and harassing an
      employee during a phone call on March 20, 2019; and

   C. On March 25, 2019, management informed him that he was not permitted to contact an
      employee unless management was present.

After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency issued its
final Agency decision concluding that it asserted legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
action, which Complainant failed to rebut.

Complainant’s supervisor (S1) indicated that when Complainant initially had an issue accessing
his online Portal, the Portal Administrator was not able to help him at that time, and S1 advised
him to contact a Senior Account Executive (E1) for help. On March 22, 2019, S1 received a
complaint from E1’s supervisor indicating that Complainant had called E1 on March 20, 2019,
about his being unable to log into the online Portal. E1 told Complainant that it was not a good
time as she was busy at that time, but she could schedule another time for him. Complainant
then raised his voice to E1 repeatedly demanding that E1 immediately work and fix his Portal
issue right away. E1 asked Complainant to calm down a couple of times but Complainant was
unprofessional and rude, and E1 felt uncomfortable with Complainant. E1 reported the incident
to her supervisor. Following E1’s supervisor’s report of the incident, S1 issued Complainant the
April 8, 2019 written admonishment (which was not a part of the official personnel file) for his
rude and unprofessional conduct in the workplace. S1 noted that Complainant had a pattern of
inappropriate yelling in the workforce, including yelling at S1 and their lenders, and she
previously discussed his inappropriate conduct with him.

S1 indicated that on March 25, 2019, she asked Complainant to refrain from further calling E1
and instead use the standard process (via the Portal Administrator) for his Portal issues.
Complainant acknowledged that on March 26, 2019, E1 contacted him and helped him to get the
Portal access without further instance.

Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law").
                                               3                                    2020003413

After a review of the record, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination. Regarding the discrete incidents, we
find that Complainant failed to show that any of the actions were motivated by discrimination.
Complainant was issued the written admonishment at issue because E1 reported to management
that Complainant was rude and unprofessional when he called her about his Portal access.
Complainant’s Portal issue was subsequently resolved. We find that Complainant failed to show
that there were any similarly situated employees not in his protected groups who were treated
differently under similar circumstances.

Furthermore, the Commission finds that under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17 (1993), Complainant's claim of hostile work environment must fail.
See Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Mar.
8, 1994). A finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that
Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by
discriminatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept.
21, 2000).

Based on the foregoing, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s action was
motivated by discrimination as he alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                4                                     2020003413

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  5                                     2020003413

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 25, 2021
Date
