             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Devon H., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                   Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                           (Transportation Security Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020004286

                               Agency No. HS-TSA-00724-2014

                                          DECISION

On July 22, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
July 9, 2020, final agency decision (final decision) concerning his equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq., and the Equal
Pay Act (EPA) of 1963, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d) et seq. For the following reasons, we
VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the matter for further processing.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented on appeal concerns whether Complainant was subjected to discrimination
based on race, sex, disability, age, and reprisal when he was allegedly paid a lower salary than
his coworkers who were performing the same duties as him.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2020004286

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Senior Federal Air
Marshal (FAM), SV-1801-I-00, at the Agency’s Charlotte Field Office in Charlotte, North
Carolina. Complainant joined the Agency on June 2, 2002, directly from the U.S. Department of
Justice (DOJ).

On March 21, 2014, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of race (Caucasian), sex (male), disability (learning disability), age
(over 40), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, the ADEA of 1967, Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and the EPA of 1963,
when on January 3, 2014 and continuing, he became aware that he was being paid a lower salary
than his coworkers who were performing the same duties as him.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing
and sought class certification for his complaint. However, on March 30, 2015, the AJ assigned
to the matter denied Complainant’s request for class certification and informed Complainant that
she would adjudicate the matter as an individual complaint. On May 26, 2015, Complainant
appealed the AJ’s March 30, 2015 decision directly to the Commission.

On January 26, 2017, the Commission vacated the AJ’s March 30, 2015, decision on the grounds
that the AJ had abused her discretion in deciding the issue of class certification without the
benefit of seeking clarification on the complaint or allowing for precertification discovery. See
Devon H. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120152087 (Jan. 26, 2017), request
for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520170354 (Aug. 10, 2017). Therefore, the Commission
remanded the matter for processing as a class complaint and the matter was returned to the same
AJ who originally denied Complainant’s request for class certification.

On March 12, 2018, Complainant filed a request to withdraw his hearing request and class
complaint. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the AJ issued an order dismissing the
complaint on March 14, 2018 and directed the Agency to issue a final decision on the merits of
the individual complaint. Approximately 848 days after the AJ issued the remand order, the
Agency issued a final decision on July 9, 2020, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove his allegations.

In finding no discrimination, the Agency initially addressed Complainant’s allegation of
discrimination based on disability. Having reviewed the record, the Agency found that
Complainant did not meet the legal definition of a “qualified individual with a disability”
because Complainant stated that his learning disability “did not affect his ability to perform his
daily activities, nor limit his ability to perform his job duties.” The Agency further found no
evidence of a disability, as “Complainant did not provide, nor did the record contain, any
evidence of Complainant’s learning disability or an accommodation thereof.”
                                               3                                    2020004286

As such, the Agency concluded that Complainant could not establish a prima facie case of
disability discrimination.

The Agency then considered Complainant’s claim under the legal standard for disparate
treatment. However, the Agency ultimately concluded that “Complainant’s salary and [in-
position-increases (IPIs)], vis-à-vis his [three] comparators, were explained by the disparity in
pay among [Federal Air Marshal Service (FAMS)] during the consolidation of FAMs within
TSA, along with Complainant’s job performance and TSA policy” rather than discrimination. In
reaching this conclusion, the Agency emphasized that Complainant did not provide any evidence
that management’s denials and explanations were untrue.

Lastly, the Agency addressed Complainant’s claim of discrimination under the EPA. While the
Agency acknowledged that Complainant had indeed “established that TSA paid different wages
to his comparator female FAMs, and that Complainant and the comparator female FAMs
performed equal work on jobs the performance of which required equal skill, effort, and
responsibility” under similar working conditions, the Agency concluded that the disparity in pay
was based on a factor other than sex. In this regard, the Agency emphasized that the disparity
was not based on sex but rather “established upon the FAMs consolidation into TSA, and that
initial TSA FAM pay was based upon each FAM’s pay at his or her previous agency.” The
Agency buttressed this argument by noting that the male FAM whom Complainant named as a
comparator “also entered TSA from his previous agency at a higher salary than Complainant,
and that disparity in salary continued.” For these reasons, the Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to show that the Agency subjected him to discrimination.

The instant appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant initially requests that the Commission enter default judgment against
the Agency as a sanction for its extreme delay in issuing a final decision on the merits of his
complaint. In so arguing, Complainant emphasizes that the Agency issued the final decision
approximately 26 months after the regulatory requirement even though three Agency attorneys
were aware that he had withdrawn his hearing request. He contends that the Agency would not
have issued a final decision had his Member of Congress not intervened. Complainant asserts
that the facts presented here demonstrate the Agency’s blatant disregard for the Commission’s
rules and regulations, thereby warranting the issuance of sanctions.

As for the merits of his complaint, Complainant first notes that the Agency conceded that he had
successfully established a prima facie case of discrimination under the EPA. He then argues that
the Agency’s hiring of two female FAMs (Comparators-1 and 3) at higher starting salaries than
him constituted discrimination because the “Agency was hiring female employees at a higher
salary than the males.”
                                                4                                    2020004286

Though Complainant acknowledges that the Agency attributed the pay disparity to the fact that
the female FAMs previously earned more than him at their previous agencies, Complainant
contends that this assertion cannot be ascertained for one of the female comparators
(Comparator-1) because the SF-50 for Comparator-1 does not list her prior agency, if any. He
maintains that the Agency’s discriminatory method of establishing initial salaries became
amplified over time because “all future pay increases and some Agency awards were based off
an employee’s annual salary.” Complainant emphasizes that the Agency’s hiring process at the
time of his hire in 2002 has already been found to be discriminatory in Gabriele G. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141757 (May 13, 2016). 2

Finally, Complainant contends that Comparator-2 (male, no disability) was treated more
favorably than him because Comparator-2 received a total of seven in-position increases between
2002 to 2014, whereas he only received three increases. Complainant attributes the favorable
treatment that Comparator-2 allegedly received to the fact that the managers who were
responsible for giving out in-position increases were the same ones whom the Commission
previously found had discriminated against him. 3 Complainant also reasons that Comparator-2
received more favorable treatment because Comparator-2 did not have a disability.




2
  In Gabriele G., supra, the Agency issued a final decision concluding that it discriminated
against complainant in violation of Title VII and the EPA when it did not allow complainant to
negotiate her initial salary as a Supervisory Transportation Security Officer (STSO) and paid her
less than similarly situated male STSOs at the Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport. In
assessing damages, the Agency determined that the EPA violation was not committed in good
faith because there was no evidence that agency officials “took affirmative steps to ascertain the
requirements of the EPA to prevent violations from occurring” or enacted other measures to
prohibit EPA violations, such as monitoring the salaries awarded by its human resources firm.
However, the Agency concluded that the EPA violation was not willful. On appeal, the
Commission affirmed the Agency’s final decision.

3
  In Complainant v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0720080048 (Dec. 10, 2009),
the Commission upheld the AJ’s finding that management at the Charlotte Field Office
discriminated against Complainant “on the basis of reprisal when he was denied light/restricted
duty.” In Devon H. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120131083 (Dec. 3, 2015),
the Commission found that the Agency subjected Complainant to discrimination based on
reprisal when the Agency failed to select Complainant for a Supervisory FAM position at the
Charlotte Field Office. In Devon H. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal Nos. 0120131649
and 0120131684 (Dec. 18, 2015), the Commission found that the Agency engaged in reprisal
against Complainant when management at the Charlotte Field Office took bets on the outcome of
Complainant’s EEO complaint, verbally assaulted Complainant, and subjected him to an internal
investigation.
                                                 5                                     2020004286

The Agency opposes Complainant’s appeal and vehemently argues that sanctions are not
warranted in this case because the delay was due to inadvertent human error. In so arguing, the
Agency explains that when the AJ served the remand order on the Agency’s attorney, the
attorney forwarded the order to the Agency’s EEO Office with instructions to provide the order
to the DHS EEO Office for the issuance of a final decision. However, the Agency EEO Office
employee who received the attorney’s email failed to comply with the attorney’s instruction and
simply added the remand order to the case file. The Agency asserts that due to this error, the
DHS EEO Office only received the remand order on May 6, 2020. The Agency argues that
sanctions are not warranted because it “has [since] undertaken a number of efforts to improve its
practices regarding processing of orders” to minimize the risk of error, including additional
training for EEO Office personnel.

As for the merits of the complaint, the Agency largely reiterates the same contentions underlying
its finding of no discrimination and emphasizes that the differential in pay between Complainant
and his comparators was based on “differences that existed when they joined the FAM Service
and/or differences in their length of prior federal service.”

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Equal Pay Act

To establish a prima case of a violation under the EPA, a complainant must show that he or she
received less pay than an individual of the opposite sex for equal work, requiring equal skill,
effort, and responsibility, under similar working conditions within the same establishment.
Sheppard v. Equal Emp’t Opportunity Comm’n, EEOC Appeal No. 01A02919 (Sept. 12, 2000),
req. for recons. den., EEOC Request No. 05A10076 (Aug. 12, 2003). Once a complainant has
met this burden, the employer may avoid liability only by showing that the difference in pay is
justified under one of the four affirmative defenses set forth in EPA: (1) a seniority system; (2) a
merit system; (3) a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production of work
(also referred to as an incentive or piecework system; or, (4) a differential based on any factor
other than sex. Id.
                                                 6                                      2020004286

The EPA permits a compensation differential based on a factor other than sex. In order to
establish this defense, an Agency must establish that a gender-neutral factor, applied
consistently, in fact explains the compensation disparity. EEOC Compliance Manual, Chapter
10: Compensation Discrimination, No. 915.003, (EEOC Compliance Manual) at 10-IV (Dec. 5,
2000). The Agency must also show that the factor is related to job requirements or otherwise is
beneficial to the Agency’s business and used reasonably in light of the Agency’s stated business
purpose as well as its other practices. Id.; Complainant v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Appeal No. 0720040139 (May 7, 2007), req. for recons. den., 0520070616 (July 25, 2007).

“Employers can offer higher compensation to applicants and employees who have greater
education, experience, training, or ability where the qualification is related to job performance or
otherwise benefits the employer’s business.” EEOC Compliance Manual at 10-IV. The
Commission has noted that such a qualification would not justify higher compensation if the
employer was not aware of it when it set the compensation, or if the employer does not
consistently rely on such a qualification. Id. Furthermore, the difference in education,
experience, training, or ability must correspond to the compensation disparity. Id. The
Commission has recognized that continued reliance on pre-hiring qualifications is less
reasonable the longer the lower paid employee has performed at a level substantially equal to, or
greater than, his or her counterpart. Id.

As the Agency in this case has conceded that Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination under the EPA, we need only determine whether the Agency has offered
sufficient evidence to justify the differential in pay under one of the four affirmative defenses set
forth in the EPA. Here, we note, in relevant part, that in its final decision, the Agency asserted
that the disparity in starting pay did not violate the EPA because “management established by a
preponderance of the evidence that the disparity in pay was attributed to a factor other than sex;
that is, pay for each FAM was established upon the FAMs consolidation into TSA, and that
initial TSA FAM pay was based upon each FAM’s pay at his or her previous agency.” On
appeal, Complainant disputes that assertion and maintains that there is insufficient evidence to
ascertain whether Comparator-1 had prior federal service. He contends that the Agency’s
discriminatory method of establishing initial salaries became amplified over time because “all
future pay increases and some Agency awards were based off an employee’s annual salary.”

Having reviewed the record, we agree with Complainant that further development of the record
is warranted, as the record is unclear as to whether the differential in starting pay was “based
upon each FAM’s pay at his or her previous agency.” In this regard, our review of Complainant’s
SF-50 shows that he joined the Agency on June 2, 2002 from the Department of Justice. ROI at
282. His starting salary was $40,740. Id. Comparator-1’s SF-50 reveals that she onboarded with
the Agency at the same duty station and in the same month as Complainant with a starting salary
of $56,493. ROI at 322. Though the Agency has repeatedly asserted that Comparator-1 received
a higher starting salary than Complainant because she earned more than Complainant at her prior
agency, we find that Comparator-1’s personnel file lacks any indicia of an inter-agency transfer
such as a “Termination – APPT In” SF-50 immediately prior to her appointment with the
Agency in 2002.
                                                7                                    2020004286

We also note that Comparator-1’s “Excepted Appointment” SF-50 reflects a “service
computation date” of June 16, 2002, that matches her onboard date with the Agency and contains
no mention of her previous federal agency (i.e., Box 14 of SF-50). Id. Given these factors, we
find it unlikely that Comparator-1 had any prior federal service before joining the Agency.

Though the Agency clarifies on appeal that the disparity in pay was based on “differences that
existed when [Complainant] and his comparators” joined the FAM Service,” it is unclear to us
what those differences were. We note that “relevant considerations in evaluating reasonableness
[of considering prior salary in setting pay] include (1) whether the employer also uses other
available predictors of the new employee’s performance, (2) whether the employer attributes less
significance to prior salary once the employee has proven himself or herself on the job; and (3)
whether the employer relies more heavily on salary when the prior job resembles the new job.”
Smith v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 07A50037 (Aug. 16, 2005) citing EEOC
Compliance Manual at 10-IV, n. 78 (citations omitted). As the record contains no affidavits from
Agency officials involved in setting the initial salaries or evidence regarding Comparator-1’s
professional experiences, qualifications, and salary history prior to joining the Agency, we are
unable to determine what differences existed between Complainant and Comparator-1 to justify
Comparator-1’s nearly $16,000 higher starting salary. Consequently, we shall remand the matter
for a supplemental investigation.

As we are remanding the complaint for further investigation, we decline to adjudicate
Complainant’s remaining allegations of disparate treatment, as such allegations are closely
intertwined with his EPA claim. We are also currently disinclined to sanction the Agency for its
oversight in issuing the final decision; however, we nevertheless remind the Agency of its
obligation to comply with the Commission’s time limits for processing complaints. Complainant
may, if he so chooses, reassert his request for sanctions if the Agency again fails to comply with
the Commission’s orders.

In summary, we shall remand the matter for further investigation into Comparator-1’s
professional experiences, qualifications, and salary history, as well as the Agency’s reasons for
paying Comparator-1 a higher initial salary.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency’s final order and REMAND the matter
for further processing as directed in the ORDER below.
                                               8                                   2020004286

                                           ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions:

       1. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
          complete a supplemental investigation into Complainant’s EPA claim. As part of the
          supplemental investigation, the Agency shall obtain the following:

           a. Any relevant evidence concerning Comparator-1’s professional experiences,
              qualifications, and salary history prior to joining the Agency. In particular, the
              supplemental investigation should include the job application that she used to
              apply for her initial position with the Agency in 2002, as well as her resume and
              supporting materials, if any; and

           b. Affidavits from all management and/or human resources official(s) involved in
              setting the initial salaries of Complainant and Comparator-1, addressing the
              process for setting salaries for candidates in 2002 and the reasons why
              Comparator-1 was awarded a significantly higher salary than other candidates
              such as Complainant.

       2. Following the completion of the supplemental investigation, the Agency shall provide
          Complainant with a copy of the supplemental investigation and afford him no less
          than thirty (30) calendar days to comment and/or respond to the supplemental
          investigation, if he so chooses.

       3. Within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of the date this decision is issued,
          the Agency shall issue a new final agency decision on the merits of the entire
          complaint.

       4. The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as
          provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”
          The report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29
          C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
                                                  9                                   2020004286

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507.
                                                 10                                     2020004286

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed
timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing
period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 11                                     2020004286

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 6, 2021
Date
