             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013




                                          Tom K., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020004274

                              Agency No. 2004-0658-2019101160

                                          DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated May 15, 2020, finding no discrimination
concerning his complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For
the following reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Lead Police Officer,
GS-7, at the Agency’s Salem VA Medical Center in Salem, Virginia.

On January 5, 2019, Complainant filed his complaint alleging discrimination based on age (over
40) when on November 5, 2018, he received a “Fully Successful” performance evaluation from
the Chief of Police, his second level supervisor (S2), when he merited an “Excellent” rating.

After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ).



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2020004274

The Agency issued its final Agency decision concluding that it asserted legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its action, which Complainant failed to rebut.

The record indicates that Complainant received a Fully Successful annual performance rating for
Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 (from October 1, 2017, to September 30, 2018) which was based on his
achievement levels of six critical elements. In order to receive an Excellent (higher than a Fully
Successful) annual rating, an employee must receive an Exceptional achievement level for all six
critical elements. Complainant received an Exceptional achievement level for three critical
elements, i.e., law enforcement, crime prevention, and emergency response. He, however,
received a Fully Successful achievement level for the remaining three critical elements, i.e.,
veteran centered policing & customer service, training & tactics, and weapons equipment &
system utilization.

Complainant’s supervisor (S1) indicated that Complainant did not submit a self-assessment for
FY 2018 as requested, and his performance rating was based on S1’s observation, review of
reports, and data tracked from journal entries. Specifically, S1 stated that Complainant was
issued Fully Successful achievement levels for those three critical elements because: he had the
lower number of documented customer service calls that he called into dispatch to be entered in
the daily operational journals; he did not conduct any of the training or assist in the training with
the Training Sergeant; his knowledge of the weapons systems was not above average; and he did
not complete additional tactics training. The record indicates that Complainant also received a
Fully Successful annual rating for FY 2017.

Complainant appealed from the Agency’s final decision.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law").

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he or she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would
support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804 n. 14.
                                                 3                                      2020004274

The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once
the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the
fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited
reason. See St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Upon review, assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination, we find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
action. Complainant was issued a Fully Successful performance annual rating for FY 2018
because his achievement level for three of his six critical elements, i.e., veteran centered policing
& customer service, training & tactics, and weapons equipment & system utilization, was Fully
Successful. Complainant did not provide S1 the requested self-assessment for FY 2018,
describing his achievement. After a review of the record, we find that Complainant failed to
show that the Agency’s articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination. Further, we
find that Complainant failed to show that there were any similarly situated employees not in his
protected groups who were treated differently under similar circumstances. Based on the
foregoing, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s action was motivated by
discrimination as he alleged.

                                          CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding of no discrimination is AFFIRMED.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                4                                     2020004274

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                5                                    2020004274

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 14, 2021
Date
