             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Mac O., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                  Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                           (Immigration and Customs Enforcement),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020002744

                                Hearing No. 570-2017-00748X

                               Agency No. HS-ICE-26168-2016

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s January 28, 2020, final
decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission MODIFIES the
Agency’s final decision.

                                    ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues are whether the Agency should be sanctioned for conducting inadequate
investigations and issuing an untimely final decision; and whether Complainant established that
the Agency discriminated against him based on his age or national origin.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2020002744

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Special Agent (GS-
1811-14) at the Agency’s Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) in Washington, D.C.

The Assistant Director (AD) for Mission Support stated that employees apply to an annual
category rating announcement to be considered for a promotion to a GS-1811-15 supervisory
position. AD stated that the Office of Human Capital conducts an initial review to determine
eligibility and refers the resumes to rating panels, who rate the candidates as Best Qualified,
Well Qualified, or Qualified. AD stated that each rating panel is comprised of three senior
management officials, and that they are trained annually and required to sign a nondisclosure
agreement regarding the evaluation criteria/benchmarks and all training materials. AD added that
the panelists also identify any applicants who they supervise, previously supervised, or know to
avoid any conflicts of interest. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 132-3.

AD stated that applicants with Well Qualified or Qualified ratings can reapply in an effort to
raise their ratings, but if an applicant subsequently receives a lower rating, the higher rating
remains the official rating. AD stated that candidates with Best Qualified ratings are then eligible
to apply for any position, and those with Well Qualified ratings are only referred for
consideration if an announcement produces less than three Best Qualified applicants. Id.

On September 22, 2014, the Agency opened the Supervisory GS-1811-15 Annual Category
Rating Opportunity under job announcement number DAL-INV-1203911-CAT-MP-PJB. ROI at
167-74. On November 19, 2014, the Acting Assistant Director (AAD) sent a global email
regarding the Notice of Results (NORs) for the Category Rating Announcement. AAD stated that
a technical error resulted in all the candidates receiving NORs of Best Qualified or multiple
NORs with different ratings. AAD stated that these NORs were invalid and that they would issue
correct NORs soon. ROI at 192. Complainant stated that on December 4, 2014, he was notified
that his Best Qualified rating was reduced to Qualified, and then his rating was subsequently
changed to Well Qualified. ROI at 101.

On March 1, 2016, the Deputy Director (DD) sent a global email announcing the cancellation of
the current Supervisory Merit Promotion Process. DD stated that in the fall of 2014, the Agency
learned that some applicants received the evaluation materials, which were not available to the
entire applicant pool. DD stated that they determined that candidates could not have received a
Best Qualified rating without the relevant experience, so those selected or determined to be Best
Qualified would retain their status. However, DD stated that effective immediately, GS-1811-15
promotional opportunities would no longer require a category rating determination. ROI at 191.

On April 13, 2016, Complainant initiated EEO counseling and on July 26, 2016, he filed an EEO
complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of national origin
(Hispanic) and age (49) with regard to application rating decisions when on November 18, 2014,
Complainant’s rating for the 2014 Supervisory GS-1811-15 Annual Category Rating
Opportunity, advertised under vacancy announcement number DALINV-1203911-CAT-MP-
                                                 3                                      2020002744

PJB, was determined to be Best Qualified. However, on December 4, 2014, Complainant’s rating
was reduced to Qualified. 2 Complainant was first made aware of the discrimination on March 1,
2016, when DD issued a broadcast email that invalidated the ratings process because the rating
evaluation materials were compromised. The Agency accepted the claim for investigation.

However, the Agency dismissed Complainant’s claims alleging retaliation when on July 7, 2016,
during the Alternative Dispute Resolution process, management revealed that it never intended
to offer a single dollar, or provide any other resolution to Complainant, and caused a waste of
money and time in setting up a mediation; and on July 7, 2016, an EEO Counselor attempted to
schedule a close out interview with Complainant, while mediations were pending, in an attempt
to intimidate Complainant. He also alleged the EEO Counselor refused to address Complainant’s
attorney’s inquiry to provide reasons for the action and manipulated the EEO process simply to
further dispirit and retaliate against Complainant. The Agency found that Complainant alleged
dissatisfaction with the EEO process, which failed to state a claim. ROI at 88.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the ROI
and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ).
Complainant timely requested a hearing. On or about October 24, 2017, Complainant filed a
motion for sanctions for the Agency’s failure to cooperate with the EEO Investigator when it did
not produce all the requested documents, such as comparative data. On or about October 25,
2017, the Agency provided a supplemental ROI, which included the workforce profile of the
relevant comparators.

On June 28, 2018, an AJ (AJ1) issued a Case Management Order and identified the claim as
whether the Agency discriminated against Complainants on the basis of sex and/or age, and/or
national origin, and/or color, and/or race, in issuance of their respective 2014 Category Ratings,
advertised under announcement number DAL-INV-1203911-CAT-MP-PJB. 3 AJ1 affirmed the
Agency’s procedural dismissals and denied the complainants’ sanctions motions.

AJ1 also ordered the Agency to produce:

    1. A table of all candidates in the 2014 Category Rating process by name; sex; national
       origin; race; age; initial (incorrect) rating; corrected rating; whether or not the individual
       received evaluation criteria in advance; any change in those individuals’ ratings
       subsequent to the determination that they unfairly received evaluation criteria in advance;
       the individuals’ 2015 Category Rating (if applicable); whether the individual was


2
  While Complainant alleged that he was given a Qualified rating, the record contains the
panelists’ notes showing that they gave Complainant a Well Qualified rating on November 6,
2014. ROI at 184.
3
  The AJ consolidated the complaints of six complainants and included a separate unrelated
claim for another complainant. The five other complainants’ appeals are addressed in EEOC
Appeal Numbers 2020002630, 2020002745, 2020003445, 2020003444, and 2020003291.
                                                 4                                    2020002744

       thereafter promoted based on their 2014 or 2015 Category Rating, and, if so, to what
       position.

    2. Copy of evaluation criteria that was released to certain applicants in 2014.

    3. Internal policies/procedures regarding the selection of panel members tasked with
       evaluating Category Rating candidates and [identity] of anyone else involved in the
       ratings process and their respective role(s).

On July 30, 2018, the Agency timely submitted its Supplemental Discovery Production. The
Agency stated that, of the 275 applicants of the 2014 Category Rating, seven were identified as
having received the evaluation materials in advance. 4 The Agency provided the demographic
information for five of the seven applicants, and it noted that it did not have the information for
the remaining two applicants because they were no longer Agency employees. On October 18,
2018, Complainant withdrew his hearing request, and a second AJ (AJ2) remanded the complaint
and ordered the Agency to issue a final decision within 60 days.

On April 3, 2019, the Agency ordered a consolidated supplemental investigation to obtain
additional testimony and documents. The Agency noted that the complainants collectively
identified 48 individuals, who allegedly received more favorable treatment in the Annual
Category Rating Process because of their races, colors, national origins, sexes, or ages. The
Agency ordered that the supplemental investigation contain:

    1. For each applicant who was actually selected for a supervisory GS-1811-15 vacancy
       pursuant to a Category Rating resulting from the JAN DAL-INV-1203911-CAT-MP-PJB
       Category Rating Opportunity: (a) Race; (b) Color; (c) National origin; (d) Sex; (e) Year
       of birth; (f) Category Rating; and (g) Application questionnaire and resume (if not
       already provided to the EEO Investigator).

    2. For each applicant who was actually selected for a supervisory GS-1811-15 vacancy
       pursuant to the Category Rating resulting from the JAN DAL-1496837-CAT-MP-PJB-15
       Category Rating Opportunity: (a) Race; (b) Color; (c) National origin; (d) Sex; (e) Year
       of birth; (f) Category Rating; and (g) Application questionnaire and resume (if not
       already provided to the Investigator).

    3. The application package (questionnaire responses and resume), Category Rating
       Opportunity Job Announcement Number(s) applied for, application outcome (Category
       Rating and whether it resulted in a selection for an actual supervisory GS-1811-15
       vacancy), and protected class status of each of the complainants’ 37 comparators for
       whom such information and materials had not yet been provided.


4
  AJ1 informed the Agency that she did not expect the Agency to contact applicants to ask if they
received the evaluation materials in advance, but to only identify those applicants it knew, or
reasonably knew, to have received the advance materials.
                                               5                                    2020002744

The Agency’s deadline to complete the supplemental investigation was July 2, 2019; however, it
did not transmit the supplemental ROI to Complainant until December 5, 2019.

On January 28, 2020, the Agency issued the final decision. As an initial matter, the Agency
affirmed the earlier procedural dismissals. The Agency found that management provided a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason when applicants received erroneous Best Qualified ratings
due to a technical error, and that Complainant was rated Well Qualified by a rating panel. The
Agency then found that Complainant did not show that the reason was pretext for discrimination.

The Agency found that, while Complainant alleged that he was discriminated against because a
management official referred to him as a “senior/elder statesman,” this official was not a member
of the panel that rated Complainant’s application, and there was no indication that he had any
role in Complainant’s 2014 rating. The Agency also determined that Complainant did not
establish that his qualifications were plainly superior to those of any of his named comparators
who were not Hispanic or more than five years younger than Complainant. The Agency
concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as
alleged.

Complainant filed the instant appeal and submitted a brief and documents in support of his
appeal. The Agency opposed Complainant’s appeal.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant’s Contentions

Through his attorney, Complainant requests that the Commission sanction the Agency with a
default judgment because it issued a deficient initial ROI; issued a deficient and untimely
supplemental ROI; and issued a final decision over one and a half years late. Complainant notes
that he filed additional motions for sanctions with AJ2 for the Agency’s failure to comply with
his October 18, 2018 dismissal order, and that AJ2 never ruled on the motions.

Complainant asserts that Irvin M. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120170498
(Apr. 25, 2019) should be a “strong precedent” for his case because the Commission issued a
default judgment when the agency issued a final decision more than two months late.
Complainant asserts that the Agency refused to provide documentation, and that it did not
respond to the core questions regarding the individuals who were advantaged, such as their ages
and national origins, and that the record was still deficient because the Agency did not provide
the most critical information regarding who benefited from the “tainted” ratings. Complainant
argues that the proper sanction is a default judgment.

Agency’s Contentions

The Agency notes that Complainant requested that the Commission impose a sanction due to
procedural issues, but he did not argue the substance of the decision.
                                                6                                    2020002744

The Agency asserts that Complainant failed to show that the Agency did not develop the
evidentiary record in violation of an EEOC order; that sanctions are warranted due to the timing
of the Agency’s issuance of its final decision; or that he was prejudiced by the Agency’s actions.

The Agency states that AJ1 did not err in deciding not to sanction the Agency for failure to
develop the evidentiary record because it timely provided its Supplemental Discovery Production
containing the documents identified in AJ1’s order, and that Complainant did not challenge the
sufficiency of these records, nor allege that the Agency had failed to comply with the order. The
Agency notes that, rather than timely file another motion with AJ1 to cure any alleged
deficiencies, Complainant chose to withdraw his hearing request. The Agency also states that
Complainant filed additional motions for sanctions with AJ2; however, AJ2 did not err in not
issuing sanctions because the Agency did not violate an EEOC order, and AJ2 no longer had
jurisdiction over Complainant’s complaint, after he remanded the complaint back to the Agency
pursuant to Complainant’s request.

The Agency states that the delay in issuing the final decision was caused by the need to reopen
the investigation to determine if there was any additional evidence that was missing that would
have had an impact on the outcome of Complainant’s case, and that extending the timeline only
served to benefit Complainant by ensuring that the record was thoroughly developed so that the
Agency could arrive at a more informed decision. The Agency asserts that, since Complainant
was not prejudiced by the Agency’s delay, a default judgment is not an appropriate sanction. The
Agency argues that Irvin M., supra, is distinguishable from this case because the Commission
determined that the severe sanction of a default judgment was warranted because the agency
“provided no explanation for its delay.” The Agency states that, if the Commission decides to
sanction the Agency for its untimely issuance of the final decision, it should narrowly tailor the
sanction and not issue a broad and severe sanction of a default judgment.

The Agency also argues that Complainant’s complaint should be dismissed as untimely. The
Agency states that, while Complainant claimed that he first learned of the alleged discrimination
on March 1, 2016, when DD sent an email invalidating the ratings process, the Agency sent
Complainant an email on December 4, 2014, notifying him of the technological error that
resulted in him receiving the Best Qualified email, and informed him of his true rating. The
Agency asserts that since there is indisputable evidence that Complainant was first informed of
the action giving rise to his discrimination claims on December 4, 2014, his initial contact with
an EEO counselor on April 13, 2016, was almost two years untimely. The Agency argues that
sanctions are not warranted and requests that the Agency affirm its final decision.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Claims

As an initial matter, we note that the Commission has the discretion to review only those issues
specifically raised in an appeal. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110) at Chap. 9, § IV.A.3. (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                7                                     2020002744

On appeal, Complainant did not contest any of the Agency’s procedural dismissals; as such, we
will not address them in the instant decision.

We also note that the Agency requests that the Commission dismiss Complainant’s claims as
untimely. EEOC regulation requires that complaints of discrimination should be brought to the
attention of the EEO counselor within forty-five (45) days of the date of the matter alleged to be
discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel action, within forty-five (45) days of the effective
date of the action. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1). The Commission has adopted a “reasonable
suspicion” standard (as opposed to a “supportive facts” standard) to determine when the forty-
five (45) day limitation period is triggered See Howard v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Request No.
05970852 (Feb. 11, 1999). Thus, the time limitation is not triggered until a complainant
reasonably suspects discrimination, but before all the facts that support a charge of
discrimination have become apparent.

In Complainant’s formal EEO complaint, he stated that the “genesis” of the complaint was DD’s
March 1, 2016 email, and he alleged that certain individuals had an unfair advantage in the
application process, while Complainant’s rating was “reduced” to promote those individuals who
were supplied the materials to guarantee that they would be rated as Best Qualified. 5 ROI at 3.
We find that Complainant’s claim is more properly framed as an allegation that he was
discriminated against based on his age and national origin when on March 1, 2016, Complainant
learned that others were given an “unfair advantage” in the 2014 Category Rating Opportunity
because they were provided the evaluation materials in advance. Complainant then initiated EEO
counseling 43 days later, on April 13, 2016. As such, we find that Complainant timely filed his
EEO complaint, and we decline to dismiss Complainant’s claim as untimely.

Sanctions

Sanctions serve a dual purpose. On the one hand, they aim to deter the underlying conduct of the
non-complying party and prevent similar misconduct in the future. Barbour v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 07A30133 (June 16, 2005). On the other hand, they are corrective and
provide equitable remedies to the opposing party. Given these dual purposes, sanctions must be
tailored to each situation by applying the least severe sanction necessary to respond to a party’s
failure to show good cause for its actions and to equitably remedy the opposing party. Royal v.
Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009). Several factors are
considered in “tailoring” a sanction and determining if a particular sanction is warranted: 1) the
extent and nature of the non-compliance, and the justification presented by the non-complying
party; 2) the prejudicial effect of the non-compliance on the opposing party; 3) the consequences
resulting from the delay in justice; and 4) the effect on the integrity of the EEO process. Gray v.
Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 07A50030 (Mar. 1, 2007).


5
  We note that Complainant’s 2014 rating was never “reduced” because he was not rated as Best
Qualified, and he was erroneously notified of a Best Qualified rating due to a technical error. The
record shows that Complainant received a Well Qualified rating on November 6, 2014. ROI at
184.
                                                 8                                      2020002744

As an initial matter, we find that neither AJ erred when they did not grant Complainant’s
motions for sanctions. We note that under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109, AJs are granted broad
discretion in the conduct of administrative hearings, including the authority to sanction a party
for failure, without good cause shown, to fully comply with an order. See Malley v. Dep’t of the
Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01951503 (May 22, 1997). We find that Complainant did not show that
AJ1 abused her discretion when she decided not to sanction the Agency and instead, ordered it to
supplement the record. We also find that AJ2 did not err because he lacked jurisdiction over
Complainant’s complaint after he dismissed Complainant’s hearing request, per his request, and
returned jurisdiction to the Agency.

An agency is required to conduct an impartial and appropriate investigation of the complaint
within 180 days of the filing of the complaint unless the parties agree in writing to extend the
time period. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(e)(2). While Complainant argued that the record was deficient
because the Agency did not respond to the core questions regarding the individuals who were
advantaged, such as their ages and national origins, and that the record was still deficient because
the Agency did not provide the most critical information regarding who benefited from the
“tainted” ratings, we find that this information is contained in the record. However, we find that
the Agency did not meet its obligation to complete an appropriate investigation within 180 days,
as shown by its two supplemental investigations and AJ1’s order to provide additional evidence.

In addition, EEOC regulations provide that an agency shall issue the final decision within 60
days of receiving notification that a complainant has requested an immediate decision or within
60 days of the end of the 30-day period for the complainant to request a hearing or an immediate
final decision where the complainant has not requested either a hearing or a decision. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). Here, the final decision was issued on January 28, 2020, which was 467 days
after AJ2’s dismissal order and 407 days late. The Agency stated that the delay in issuing the
final decision was caused by the need to reopen the investigation. While Complainant argued
that Irvin M. should be a “strong precedent,” we find that it differs because the agency did not
provide any explanation for its delay in issuing a final decision, while here, the Agency provided
an explanation.

On appeal, Complainant requested that the Commission sanction the Agency with a default
judgment for issuing a deficient initial ROI; a deficient and untimely supplemental ROI; and a
final decision over one and a half years late. In this case, we find that the Agency did not act in a
manner to warrant a default judgment. See e.g., Beatrice B. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC
Appeal No. 2019001641 (September 17, 2020) (the Commission declined to issue a sanction
where following a supplemental investigation, the agency delayed in issuing a final decision for
over eight months); Denisse Y. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120171448
(Apr. 30, 2019) (the Commission declined to grant the complainant’s request for a default
judgment and sanctioned the agency with a posting notice and training for EEO personnel for its
delays in issuing the report of investigation and final decision).
                                                 9                                     2020002744

Based on the specific circumstances of this case, we find the most appropriate sanction to
address the Agency’s conduct is to order the Agency to: (1) analyze its performance in
conducting timely and adequate EEO investigations and issuing timely final decisions in
accordance with the Commission’s regulations during this Fiscal Year and the previous two
fiscal years, and to report its findings to the EEOC. In the event the Agency finds it is not in
compliance with the Commission’s regulations on EEO investigations and final decisions, the
Agency is directed to propose to the EEOC a corrective plan of action; and (2) provide training
to its EEO personnel who failed to comply with our regulations. Our decision to sanction the
Agency in this matter will effectively emphasize to the Agency the need to comply with
Commission regulations and orders in a timely manner.

Disparate Treatment

Generally, claims of disparate treatment are examined under the analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Hochstadt v. Worcester Found. for
Experimental Biology, Inc., 425 F. Supp. 318, 324 (D. Mass.), aff’d, 545 F.2d 222 (1st Cir.
1976). For Complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. Furnco Constr.
Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978); McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13. Once
Complainant has established a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine,
450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). If the Agency is successful, the burden reverts back to Complainant to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s reason(s) for its action was a
pretext for discrimination. At all times, Complainant retains the burden of persuasion, and it is
his obligation to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a
prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993); U.S. Postal Serv. v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 715-716 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on
his age and national origin, we find that the Agency proffered a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its action. The record shows that the Agency’s Office of Professional Responsibility
conducted an investigation when a management official suspected an applicant of plagiarism of a
“controlled benchmark document.” The investigation revealed that a former Special Agent in
Charge (SAC) of the HSI in El Paso, Texas made an unauthorized distribution of the evaluation
materials when he asked his then Secretary to email them to all the HSI El Paso GS-14
supervisors. SAC stated that his intention was to help employees, and the Secretary confirmed
that he emailed the materials on March 31, 2014, pursuant to SAC’s instructions to assist the
employees seeking advancement. The email was sent to approximately thirty recipients. In
addition, the supervisors were invited to a “familiarization” session on March 31, 2014,
presented by SAC, to discuss the application process for a GS-15 Assistant Special Agent in
Charge position.
                                                10                                    2020002744

In its response to AJ1’s order to supplement the record, the Agency identified seven El Paso
supervisors who received the advance evaluation materials and applied to the 2014 Category
Rating Opportunity. Two applicants received Best Qualified ratings; four applicants received
Well Qualified ratings; and one applicant received a Qualified rating. Of the five applicants who
were still employed with the Agency, the record shows that they were all male; four were White
and one was Hispanic; and their ages ranged from 43 to 52 years old. Agency’s Supplemental
Discovery Production, Tab A.

We find that Complainant has not shown that the proffered reasons were pretext for
discrimination. Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such weaknesses, inconsistencies, or
contradictions in the Agency’s proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. See Opare-Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007) (finding that the agency’s explanations were
confusing, contradictory, and lacking credibility, which were then successfully rebutted by the
complainant), request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520080211 (May 30, 2008). Here,
the record shows that one manager in the agency’s El Paso office took it upon himself to assist
the supervisors in his particular office by providing them the evaluation materials in advance.
This affected everyone equally if you did not work in the El Paso office, and there is nothing to
indicate this action was done for a discriminatory animus, but rather a misguided attempt to
assist his employees obtain promotion. The Agency rightly found the process tainted and
canceled the selection process.

Here, we find that Complainant did not receive the advance materials because he was not a
supervisor in the El Paso office. In addition, there is no evidence that any of the HSI El Paso GS-
14 supervisors were excluded from receiving the evaluation materials. We also find that the
record does not contain evidence of any other advance disclosure of the evaluation materials,
aside from the El Paso disclosure. Complainant did not provide any evidence to show pretext for
discrimination. Accordingly, we find that Complainant did not establish that the Agency
discriminated against him based on his age or national origin.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding that Complainant
did not establish that the Agency discriminated against him based on his age or national origin.
The Agency’s final decision, however, is MODIFIED in accordance with this decision and the
ORDER below.

                                             ORDER

Within 60 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall:

   1. issue a written report to Director, Federal Sector Programs (FSP), Office of Federal
      Operations (OFO) that includes:
                                               11                                    2020002744

           a. An analysis into the Agency’s performance in conducting timely and adequate
              investigations and issuing timely final decisions on EEO complaints during Fiscal
              Years 2019, 2020, and 2021.
           b. A detailed action plan setting forth how the problems identified in its analysis, if
              any, will be corrected; any delays ended; and the processing of EEO complaints
              will be brought in accordance with EEOC regulations. The Agency shall
              collaborate with contractors who process their EEO complaints when developing
              the action plan, and such plan will include specific and reasonable timeframes
              within which to meet such goals. The Agency shall provide quarterly progress
              reports to FSP on the achievements of its action plan throughout Fiscal Year 2022
              and shall include a report of its progress in its next MD-715 report.
    2. provide at least two (2) hours of in-person or interactive training to EEO personnel in the
       Department of Homeland Security’s Office of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties and the
       U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s Office of Diversity and Civil Rights
       involved in processing complaints regarding their case processing responsibilities, with
       special emphasis on the importance of abiding by regulatory mandates and time limits. 6

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the statement
entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall include supporting
documentation verifying that the corrective action has been implemented.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).


6
 The record indicates that the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s Office of Diversity
and Civil Rights conducted the investigations, while the Department of Homeland Security’s
Office of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties issued the final decision.
                                                  12                                  2020002744

Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in
accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying
complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If
the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                               13                                   2020002744

Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service
on the other party, unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in
which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 14                                     2020002744

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 9, 2021
Date
