             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Stuart M., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                     Merrick B. Garland,
                                      Attorney General,
                                    Department of Justice
                     (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives),
                                           Agency.

                                    Request No. 2021001928
                                    Request No. 2021000275
                                    Appeal No. 2019001785

                                 Agency No. ATF-2015-01774

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in Stuart M. v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Request No.
2021000275 (December 29, 2020). EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its
discretion, grant a request to reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision
will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(c). For the reasons set forth below, Complainant’s request is DENIED.

On September 17, 2020, the Commission issued a decision concerning the subject complaint in
EEOC Appeal No. 2019001785, which, in part, vacated the Agency’s finding of no
discrimination and remanded for a supplemental investigation Complainant’s claim that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination on the basis of disability (posttraumatic stress disorder)
when the Agency took the following actions:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2021001928

       4. On May 22, 2015, management told him he had to respond to whether he
       would accept or decline a lower-grade position of Investigative Analyst, GS-
       1805-07, by June 1, 2015; and
       7. On May 11, 2015, management forced him to apply for disability retirement or
       take a downgrade to the position of Investigative Analyst, GS-07. 2

The supplemental investigation was ordered because the Commission found no evidence in the
record to corroborate the Agency’s determination that there were no vacant positions in the 1811
law enforcement series to which Complainant could have been assigned, or that it offered
Complainant lower graded GS-7/9 Investigative Analyst positions only after no comparable
vacant position could be found. In remanding the complaint, the decision also directed the
Agency to develop Complainant’s claim that he was constructively discharged.

On October 14, 2020, the Agency filed a request for reconsideration of the appellate decision.
The Agency argued that: (1) Complainant abandoned his constructive discharge claim “during
the administrative litigation because he specifically informed the Chief Administrative Judge that
he was not pursuing the claim”; 3 (2) the Commission erred in finding that discovery conducted
before the Administrative Judge did not describe the extent to which the Agency conducted a
search for a vacant, funded position; and (3) “in light of the extensive discovery that [was] in
possession of [Complainant], the Commission improperly placed the burden on the Agency to
establish that it [was] more likely than not that there were vacancies during the relevant time
period into which [Complainant] could have been reassigned.” In support of its request, the
Agency submitted over 400 pages of documents that were generated during discovery but not
provided on appeal.

In Stuart M. v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Request No. 2021000275 (December 29, 2020), the
Commission denied that Agency’s request because it failed to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(c). Specifically, the previous decision found that the Agency could not present new
evidence as a basis for requesting reconsideration, and that the previous decision was properly
decided based on the evidence available to the Commission at the time; nevertheless, in the
interest of administrative economy, the Commission exercised its discretion to reopen the matter
on its own motion to consider the Agency’s newly submitted evidence. According to the
Commission, the new evidence presented by the Agency addressed the evidentiary deficiencies
noted in EEOC Appeal No. 2019001785, and as such a remand for a supplemental investigation
was not necessary.




2
  These are the only two claims (plus the constructive discharge claim discussed herein) at issue
in the Complainant’s instant request to reconsider our prior decision. Our prior decision in EEOC
Appeal No. 2019001785 found no discrimination on all other claims in the complaint.
Complainant did not request reconsideration of the decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2019001785
3
  Complainant initially requested an administrative hearing, but later withdrew his request and
asked for a final decision from the Agency.
                                                3                                     2021001928

Upon review of the Agency’s documentation, our previous decision in EEOC Appeal No.
2021000275 initially found that Complainant expressly waived his constructive discharge claim.
Additionally, the decision found that the Agency conducted a good faith effort to search for
vacant, funded positions for Complainant, including offering him the opportunity to find
positions that he wanted. However, these efforts were unfruitful due to Complainant’s very
general resume and his geographic restrictions. Finally, the previous decision found that the
Agency’s offer of two Investigative Analyst positions, was an effective offer of accommodation,
that was enough to meet its legal obligations under the Rehabilitation Act.

In his instant request, Complainant does not address the factual or legal conclusions that were set
forth in our previous decision. Instead, he argues that the previous decision should be
reconsidered because: (1) the Commission violated his Fifth Amendment right to due process by
finding facts in this matter, in the interest of its administrative convenience, without any
regularized process to obtain the evidence it asked for in this matter; and (2) the Commission
wrongly allowed the Agency to introduce new evidence at the appellate level to support its
position regarding the claims without requiring an affirmative showing it was previously
unavailable.

We find that Complainant did not provide any argument or evidence that warrants granting his
request. The Commission emphasizes that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to
the Commission. Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110) (Aug. 5, 2015), at 9-18; see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request
No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20, 2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to
demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material
fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the
Agency. Complainant has not done so here.

As noted by the previous decision, the new evidence presented by the Agency, which was
already generated during discovery, addressed the evidentiary deficiencies in the record that
were noted in EEOC Appeal No. 2019001785 and made a supplemental investigation
unnecessary. Therefore, based on the specific facts of this case, we find the Commission did not
abuse its discretion to reopen any decision that it issues when it found that new evidence
rendered the prior remand for a supplemental investigation unnecessary. We also note that
Complainant never questioned the accuracy of this evidence, nor did he argue that it was
unavailable to him. 4




4
  Complainant argued that he did not have the ability to respond to the new evidence, but as
noted earlier in this decision, Complainant, in his request, does not question a single factual or
legal determination made by the previous decision; nor does he argue that the documentation was
not already available to him via discovery.
                                               4                                    2021001928

We also reject Complainant’s speculative argument that, “[t]housands of federal employees who
have their cases heard by the Office of Federal Operations can now cite the Commission’s
December 29th decision as precedent that they too can introduce new evidence without an
affirmative showing that the evidence was previously unavailable in reliance upon the new
‘interest of administrative economy,’ exception to the prior rule.” As the previous decision
clearly stated, in denying the Agency’s request, the Commission long ago eliminated the
provision allowing for employees and agencies to submit new and material evidence as a basis
for requesting reconsideration. Our previous decision was based solely on our determination that
a supplemental investigation was unnecessary because the information we ordered the Agency to
produce was already available and it would have served no purpose to remand this matter.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Request No. 2021000275 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  5                                     2021001928

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 31, 2021
Date
