             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Nigel S., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2022002983

                            Agency No. 200P-0640-2021-102-436

                                          DECISION

On May 2, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 25, 2022, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

During the relevant time, Complainant was an applicant for a pipefitter position at the Agency’s
Palo Alto Medical Center in Palo Alto, California.

On April 2, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the basis of race (Caucasian) when, on or about April 17, 2020, he was not
selected for a pipefitter position at the Palo Alto VA Healthcare System.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022002983

The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Emp’t Opportunity Mgmt. Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at
Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that
the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Upon review of the record as a whole, we find that the Agency’s final decision accurately
recounts the relevant material facts and law. Moreover, the Agency’s final decision properly
determined that management officials articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions.

The Commission notes that Complainant has not proven, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that he was interviewed for the position at all. Foreman and Associate Chief denied claims made
by Complainant and Referrer that any employment interview took place. Record of Investigation
(ROI) at 43, 63, 71, 75, 79-80. As to Complainant’s allegation that Supervisor, now deceased,
said that Complainant was not hired because he is Caucasian, there is no corroborating evidence
in the evidentiary file that such a comment was made. ROI at 43. Complainant bears the burden
to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged discriminatory acts occurred.
When the evidence is at best equipoise, Complainant fails to meet that burden. See Lore v. Dep't
of Homeland Sec., EEOC App. No. 0120113283 (Sept. 13, 2013) (complainant failed to
establish that witnesses made false statements where he withdrew his request for a hearing and
credibility determinations were unable to be made); Brand v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC App. No.
0120102187 (Aug. 23, 2012) (complainant failed to establish that his coworker made offensive
comments in a “he said, she said” situation where complainant requested a final decision and an
Administrative Judge did not make credibility determinations). Therefore, Complainant has
failed to establish that he was discriminated against based on his race.

Complainant offers no evidence that any of the reasons the Agency provided to explain its action
are pretextual. Beyond Complainant’s bare assertions, the record is devoid of any indication that
the Agency’s actions were motivated by discriminatory animus.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.
                                                  3                                 2022002983

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                4                                     2022002983

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 21, 2022
Date
