             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Shelby R., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                   Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                           (Transportation Security Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020005406

                                Hearing No. 440-2017-00080X

                               Agency No. HS-TSA-00187-20

                                         DECISION

On September 23, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 4, 2020, 2 final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we MODIFY the
Agency’s final order, in part, and REMAND the complaint for further processing.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Transportation
Security Officer (TSO), SV-1802, at the Sloulin Field International Airport (ISN) in Williston,
North Dakota. He joined the Agency on May 25, 2016, subject to a two-year trial period.
Complainant was directly supervised by the Supervisory Transportation Security Officer
(Supervisor), who, in turn, was supervised by the Transportation Security Manager (Manager).
The Assistant Federal Security Director for Screening (Assistant Director) supervised the
Manager and served as Complainant’s third level supervisor.


1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  The Agency served its August 4, 2020, final order on August 25, 2020.
                                                 2                                   2020005406

On February 10, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of national origin (Honduras) and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity under Title VII when:

         1. In July 2016, management denied Complainant’s request to work additional hours;

         2. From July 2016 to October 6, 2016, management delayed Complainant’s training and
            certification to screen individuals-with-disabilities (IWD), and told Complainant that
            other officers had priority over him to receive on-the-job-training (OJT) for IWD
            certification;

         3. On August 15, 2016, management issued Complainant a Letter of Counseling (LOC)
            for failing to follow procedures; 3

         4. On or around September 1, 2016, management made fun of Complainant’s accent
            when management joked that Complainant stated “panties” instead of “pants”;

         5. On September 11, 2016, management issued Complainant a LOC for violations
            which had not been discussed with Complainant and had occurred in July 2016 and
            August 2016;

         6. On October 9, 2016, management told Complainant that he needed to work on his
            English;

         7. On October 9, 2016, management directed Complainant to go home 1.5 hours before
            his shift ended;

         8. On October 19, 2016, management issued Complainant a LOC for violating Standard
            Operating Procedures (SOP) though Complainant followed the orders of
            management;

         9. On October 20, 2016, management told Complainant that if any of his accusations
            against management were untrue, he would be terminated;

         10. On November 22, 2016, management removed Complainant from employment by
             letter dated November 8, 2016; and

         11. On November 22, 2016, Complainant became aware by termination letter that he was
             accused of workplace violence on or about November 13, 2016.




3
    Complainant withdrew claim 3. See Complainant’s Appellate Brief at fn. 5.
                                                 3                                      2020005406

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a
hearing; however, on April 23, 2018, the Agency filed a motion for a decision.

Complainant subsequently filed an opposition to the Agency’s motion. In his opposition,
Complainant argued that there were sufficient genuine issues of material fact in dispute to
preclude the issuance of a decision without a hearing, and that he could in fact establish a prima
facie case of discrimination. Complainant contended that “[t]runcation of this process, while
material facts are still in dispute and the credibility of witnesses is still ripe for challenge,
improperly deprives [him] of a full and fair investigation of [his] claims.”

Over Complainant’s objections, the AJ assigned to the case granted the Agency’s April 23, 2018,
motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision without a hearing on July 2, 2020.
The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant initially argues that his case “was not properly dismissed because the AJ
analyzed [his] claim of reprisal under the improper legal standard.” In relevant part, Complainant
reiterates that the Agency subjected him to reprisal when management told him that “he would
be terminated if his accusations regarding discrimination by supervisors were proven to be
untrue.” As for the merits of his case, Complainant contends that the AJ should not have issued a
decision without a hearing “because issues of material fact and credibility remain unaddressed.”

The Agency opposes the appeal, and requests that the Commission affirm its final order. In so
arguing, the Agency maintains that the AJ did, in fact, apply the proper legal standard for
reprisal. The Agency, in relevant part, also emphasizes that “[t]here was no retaliation per se
with respect to issue 9” because Complainant had “levied serious allegations against
management, and the Assistant Director truthfully informed Complainant that under Agency
policy, “false, defamatory, and disparaging statements” could result in discipline. Finally, the
Agency disputes the purported credibility issues that Complainant raises on appeal and reiterates
that there are no genuine issues of material fact in dispute to warrant a hearing.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is
“genuine” if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-
moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp.,
846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the outcome
of the case.
                                                 4                                      2020005406

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a)(stating that a
“decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review…”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (as revised, August 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative
judge’s determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be
reviewed de novo).

In order to successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a complainant must identify,
with specificity, facts in dispute either within the record or by producing further supporting
evidence and must further establish that such facts are material under applicable law. Such a
dispute would indicate that a hearing is necessary to produce evidence to support a finding that
the Agency was motivated by discriminatory animus. Upon review, we find that summary
judgment was appropriate as the record had been adequately developed and that there were no
material facts in dispute.

Claims 1-2, 4-8, and 10-11

With regard to claims 1-2, 4-8, and 10-11, we find that the AJ correctly determined, using the
proper legal standard, that the preponderant evidence failed to establish that Complainant was
subjected to discrimination as alleged. Even construing any inferences raised by the undisputed
facts in favor of Complainant, a reasonable factfinder could not find in Complainant’s favor.

Claim 9

For claim 9, however, we find that the Agency subjected Complainant to discrimination on the
basis of reprisal when, on October 20, 2016, management told Complainant that if any of his
accusations against management were untrue, he would be terminated.

As a general matter, the statutory anti-retaliation provisions prohibit any adverse treatment that is
sufficient to dissuade a “reasonable person” from making or supporting a charge of
discrimination. See Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006);
EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, §
II(B)(3) & n. 137 (Aug. 25, 2016). Although petty slights and trivial annoyances are not
actionable, adverse actions or threats to take adverse actions such as reprimands, negative
evaluations, and harassment are actionable. Id.

Given the importance of maintaining “unfettered access to [the] statutory remedial mechanisms”
in the anti-retaliation provisions, we have found a broad range of actions to be retaliatory. For
example, we have held that a supervisor threatening an employee by saying, “What goes around,
comes around” when discussing an EEO complaint constitutes reprisal. Vincent v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120072908 (Aug. 3, 2009), req. for recons. den., EEOC Request No.
0520090654 (Dec. 16, 2010).
                                                  5                                     2020005406

Actions, such as warning a complainant not to make false accusations or risk disciplinary action
may also amount to retaliation on its face. See Manuel R. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No.
0120142958 (Dec. 2, 2016) (declining to find retaliation where, after a hearing, the record failed
to show that the named responsible management official warned complainant not to make false
allegations or risk losing his job).

In the instant case, the record shows that Complainant met with the Manager and Assistant
Director to discuss his concerns about the Supervisor. During the EEO investigation,
Complainant stated that he told the Assistant Director that he had “asked [the Supervisor] for
additional hours, and [the Supervisor] discriminated against [him] by giving the hours to a
Caucasian employee.” ROI at 85. Complainant also claimed that he told the Assistant Director
that the Supervisor had commented on his English and issued him LOCs for reporting
misconduct and discrimination. Id. Complainant asserted that the Assistant Director responded
by warning Complainant that “if anything [he] said was untrue, [he] would be terminated from
[the Agency].” Id. It is undisputed that the Assistant Director warned Complainant that he risked
termination if his accusations turned out to be untrue. Specifically, the Assistant Director
admitted to stating the following:

        I explained to [Complainant] that during our discussion he has made some very
        serious accusation[s] towards the ISN LTSO, [Supervisor], [Manager] and the ND
        training department and that we take these issues seriously. I explained that some
        of his accusations, if found to be correct, could possibly result in these individuals
        losing their jobs and conversely if it were proven that his claims were false it may
        cost him his job as well.

Id. at 146.

While we certainly understand both the Assistant Director concerns and the Agency’s arguments
on appeal, we nevertheless find the underlying warning in claim 9 to be retaliatory. We have
long held that the truth or falsity of a complainant’s allegations goes to the merits of the
complaint and is irrelevant as to whether he or she can bring a claim of discrimination. See
Zhang v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982202 (Apr. 28, 1999). We are particularly
concerned that the broad warning made by the Assistant Director could dissuade a reasonable
person from engaging in protected EEO activity for fear that an unsuccessful EEO complaint
could result in disciplinary action. That was the issue of concern in Manuel R., supra. While the
complainant in that case was unable to prove that the accused management official uttered the
alleged warning, there is no such dispute here. We, therefore, conclude that the Agency subjected
Complainant to unlawful retaliation as alleged. 4


4
 Complainant may be entitled to compensatory damages to the extent that he is able to show a
compensable harm as a result of the retaliatory incident. Vincent v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120072908 (Aug. 3, 2009) citing Binseel v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Request No.
05970584 (Oct. 8, 1998) (a finding of retaliation on its face does not automatically entitle a
complainant to a damages award).
                                                  6                                     2020005406

                                           CONCLUSION

We AFFIRM the Agency’s final order on claims 1-2, 4-8, and 10-11. However, on claim 9, we
REVERSE the Agency’s finding of no discrimination and REMAND the claim to the Agency for
further processing. The Agency shall comply with the relief in the following Order.

                                               ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions:

      1. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         complete a supplemental investigation concerning Complainant’s entitlement to
         compensatory damages and determine the amount of compensatory damages due
         Complainant in a final decision with appeal rights to the Commission. The Agency shall
         pay this amount to Complainant within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the
         determination of the amount of compensatory damages. If there is a dispute regarding the
         exact amount of compensatory damages, the Agency shall issue a check to Complainant
         for the undisputed amount. Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of
         the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the
         Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation
         of the Commission’s Decision.”

      2. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         provide eight hours of interactive EEO training to the Assistant Director. 5 The required
         training shall address management’s responsibilities with regard to eliminating
         discrimination and reprisal in the workplace.

      3. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         consider taking disciplinary action against the Assistant Director. The Commission does
         not consider training to be a disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to
         the Commission and specify what, if any, action was taken. If the Agency decides not to
         take disciplinary action, then it shall set forth the reasons for its decision not to impose
         discipline.

      4. The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the paragraph entitled, “Posting
         Order.”

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the statement
entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall include supporting
documentation verifying that the corrective action has been implemented.



5
    The Assistant Director is identified on page 140 of the ROI.
                                                7                                     2020005406

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at the Sloulin Field International Airport copies of the attached
notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency’s duly authorized representative,
shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar
days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in
conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted. The
Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered
by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as
directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission’s Decision," within 10
calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format and
must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               8                                    2020005406

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                9                                    2020005406

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 28, 2022
Date
