             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Murray H., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                     Lonnie G. Bunch III,
                                          Secretary,
                                    Smithsonian Institution,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021000171

                                 Hearing No. 570-2019-01402X

                                   Agency No. 18-24-090618

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s August 31, 2020, final
decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
(ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant was an applicant for employment with the Agency’s
facility in Washington, D.C.

On September 6, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him based on disability (Parkinson’s Disease) and age (54 years old at the
time of the incident) when, on June 28, 2018, Complainant was not selected for the position of
Music Curator with the National Museum of American History, advertised under vacancy
announcement no. 18A-SB-303311-MPA-NMA.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                     2021000171

The Agency initially dismissed the complaint on procedural grounds. Complainant appealed to
EEOC. In EEOC Appeal No. 2019000719 (Feb. 6, 2019), we reversed the Agency’s dismissal
and remanded the matter to the Agency for an investigation.

Upon completion of the investigation, Complainant requested a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant subsequently requested withdrawal of his hearing
request. On August 10, 2020, the AJ remanded the matter to the Agency for a final decision.

The Agency issued a final decision finding no discrimination. The Agency found that the review
panel for the position at issue was not aware of Complainant’s disability. The Agency stated that
while Complainant submitted a cover letter which set forth his medical condition and a statement
from a physician regarding his medical condition with his application, these documents were not
provided to the review panel. The final decision further found that the Agency articulated a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s non-selection. Specifically, the Agency
stated that Complainant was not selected for an interview because other applicants were better
qualified. The Agency further found that Complainant failed to establish that the Agency’s
articulated reason was pretext for discrimination. In addition, the Agency found that
Complainant failed to establish that his qualifications were plainly superior to those of the
selectee. Finally, the Agency found that after the selectee declined the position, the remaining
candidates were not considered to be strong enough by the panel and the vacancy was cancelled.

The instant appeal followed. Complainant, though his attorney, requests that we reverse the
Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination and asserts that the Agency’s reasons for his
non-selection kept changing. Complainant asserts that he submitted various documents with his
application package which indicated a statement that he has Parkinson’s Disease. In addition,
Complainant asserts that his resume lists his college graduation date, so the Agency would have
been aware that he was over 40 years old. Complainant asserts that he applied through the MPA
(Merits Promotion Announcement) which was open to Schedule A applicants. 2 Complainant
asserts that the Agency’s Human Resources Specialist (HR1) stated that the review panel never
reviewed the MPA candidates. Complainant asserts that he met or exceeded the qualifications
for the position. Complainant asserts HR1 instructed him to apply through the MPA
announcement because he had a disability, but then instructed the selection panel not to review
the MPA candidates. Complainant states his application was not ranked/scored such as
applicants under the DEU listing, and there is no contemporaneous evidence that the applications
from the MPA listing were reviewed or considered by the panel. Complainant states that after
the selectee declined the position the vacancy was cancelled to avoid giving him the position due
to his age and disability. Complainant asserts that the review panel did not want to select
someone from the MPA list because the panel may be selecting someone with a disability. ROI
at 159.




2
  The position at issue was also advertised under a Delegating Examining Unit (DEU)
announcement.
                                               3                                      2021000171

In response, the Agency asserts that its reason for not selecting Complainant has not changed.
The Agency reiterates that the review panel only received Complainant’s resume and assessment
questionnaire and therefore was not aware that Complainant has Parkinson’s Disease. The
Agency asserts that HR1 lacks knowledge of what the panel did with the MPA resumes after
they received them. The Agency reiterates that the review panel did review MPA resumes after
HR1 issued the MPA certificate.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas Dep’t of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the
complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of
the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary’s Honor
Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Serv. Bd.
of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Dep’t of Transportation,
EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep’t of Health and Human Services,
EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Petition
No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).
                                                4                                      2021000171

The record is insufficient to allow a determination on the merits of the instant formal complaint.
Our regulations and EEOC Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO-MD-110)(rev.
Aug. 5, 2015), requires agencies to develop a complete and factual record. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108(b), EEO MD-110, Chapter 6.

The position at issue was advertised under two vacancy announcements: Merit Promotions
Announcement (MPA) and a Delegating Examining Unit (DEU) announcement. Complainant
only applied under the MPA announcement. Approximately 79 applicants from the DEU listing
were forwarded for consideration, while seven candidates were forwarded to the review panel
under the MPA listing. Agency’s Responses to Complainant’s Interrogatories at Q.6.           The
review panel scored the applications and ranked the candidates from the DEU listing. Id. The
review panel interviewed the top six candidates from the DEU listing. 3 Subsequent to the
interviews, the top three candidates were invited back to the Agency to give presentations to the
panel. Id. The panel made a selection and the selectee declined the position. Id. Subsequently,
the Agency cancelled the vacancies for the position at issue. Id. Complainant asserts that while
the Agency states that it considered or reviewed the applicants from the MPA listing, there is no
contemporaneous evidence that review panel considered MPA applicants who were comprised of
Schedule A applicants (individuals with disabilities) and certain other individuals. 4

We find that the record warrants further development. The Agency asserts as its legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s non-selection that the applications from the MPA
listing were considered and reviewed by the review panel and the panel members agreed that the
top DEU applicants were better than the MPA applicants. Agency’s Response to Complainant’s
Interrogatories (Interr.) Q.6. The record contains documentation reflecting that review panel
rated and ranked the applications of the DEU candidates. Agency’s Appendix to Brief in
Opposition to Appeal Ex. 14-15. The record contains an affidavit from the Chair of the Review
Panel (Chair). The Chair, in his affidavit, asserts that “upon review of the applications, the panel
deemed the DEU candidates were the best qualified.” Report of ROI at 187, Question 29. The
Chair, in his affidavit, further asserts that he does not know if “Complainant was informed that
he was not ranked as high as the candidates that were interviewed.” (emphasis added), ROI at
187 Q. 33. This response seems to imply that the MPA applicants were also scored and ranked
similar to DEU candidates. However, the record does not contain documentation indicating that
the MPA candidates were scored and ranked similar to the DEU candidates. Furthermore, the
record contains an affidavit from HR1. Therein, HR1 asserts that “the MPA applicants were not
reviewed at all by the hiring manager.” 5 ROI at 195 Q. 33; ROI at 197 Q. 37.


3
    The record reflects that no applicants from the MPA listing were interviewed.
4
 The record reflects that the MPA was open to current or formal competitive service federal
employees, veterans, individuals with disabilities, military spouses, and former Peace Corps,
AmeriCorps, and Vista volunteers. ROI at 205.
5
 It is unclear from HR1’s affidavit what personal knowledge she would have had regarding
whether the review panel considered or reviewed applications from the MPA listing because
                                               5                                     2021000171

HR1’s statement appears to conflict with the Chair’s statement that the applications for the MPA
candidates were reviewed. The record also does not contain affidavits from any other members
of the review panel (other than the Chair’s) regarding the review panel’s role in reviewing or
considering applications from MPA candidates. 6

The Chair asserts that the review panel only received from HR1 the resumes and the responses to
the Applicant Assessment Questions with respect to the MPA candidates and thus was not aware
that Complainant had Parkinson’s Disease. Agency’s Response to Complainant’s Interr. Q. 16.
However, Complainant asserts that he submitted a cover letter and other documentation with his
application indicating that he had a disability. ROI 152-153. Moreover, the record reflects that
while the record contains an affidavit from HR1, HR1 did not address, in her affidavit, what
documentation she provided to the review panel regarding the MPA applicants.

Based on the foregoing, we find that the record before us is inadequate. This matter warrants a
supplemental investigation for the Chair to clarify his statements with respect to exactly how the
applications for the MPA candidates were reviewed or considered by the review panel. In
addition, the supplemental investigation shall obtain affidavits from the other members of the
review panel to obtain their responses to if and how they reviewed or considered the MPA
candidates. Finally, the supplemental investigation should obtain a supplemental affidavit from
HR1 regarding what documents she submitted to the review panel regarding the MPA applicants
and how she was informed that the panel did not review/consider the applicants from the MPA
listing.

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination and REMAND
this matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation in accordance with the ORDER
below.

                                            ORDER

    1. The Agency shall ensure that its investigation completes the ordered supplemental
       investigation of the complaint within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this appellate
       decision is issued. As part of the supplemental investigation:

       (a) The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains a supplemental affidavit from
           the Chair. The supplemental affidavit shall address with specificity exactly how (i.e.
           through verbal discussion, scoring and ranking of applications etc.) the review panel
           considered or reviewed applicants from the MPA listing.



HR1 asserts that she was not on the review panel and did not assist in the interview process. ROI
at 195 Q. 30.
6
  The record is devoid of evidence that the investigator even attempted to obtain affidavits from
the other members of the review panel.
                                           6                                     2021000171

   (b) The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains affidavits from the other
       individuals that served on the review panel. (ROI at 186-87 Q. 27). These affidavits
       shall address with specificity whether the review panel considered the applications of
       the MPA candidates. If the members of the review panel indicate that they reviewed
       or considered applications from the MPA listing, the affidavits should also address,
       with specificity, how the MPA candidates were reviewed (i.e. solely through verbal
       discussion, scoring and ranking system etc). The affidavits from the other members
       of the review panel shall specify what documentation (if any) they reviewed with
       respect to the candidates from the MPA listing.

   (c) The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains any documentation (if
       applicable) that the review panel reviewed or considered the applicants from the MPA
       listing.

   (d) The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains a supplemental affidavit from
       HR1. The supplemental affidavit shall address what specific documents Human
       Resources forwarded to the review panel regarding the applicants from the MPA
       listing. The supplemental affidavit should also address whether HR1 or human
       resources personnel communicated to the members of the review panel information
       regarding Complainant’s medical condition. Finally, HR1’s supplemental affidavit
       shall address who and how she was informed that the review panel did not review the
       MPA applicants.

   (e) The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains any other affidavits or
       documentation not specifically requested in the Order, and consistent with this
       opinion, which may be relevant in determining the merits of Complainant’s
       complaint.

(2) Once the investigator completes the supplemental investigation, the Agency shall provide
    Complainant, within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the Agency completes the
    supplemental investigation, an opportunity to respond to the supplemental investigative
    report. The Agency shall then issue a new final agency decision, with appeal rights to the
    Commission, within thirty (30) calendar days of Complainant’s response or, if
    Complainant fails to respond, within thirty calendar days following the last day
    Complainant would have been permitted to respond.

(3) Copies of the completed supplemental investigation and the new final agency decision
    must be submitted to the Commission’s Compliance Officer, as referenced below.
                                               7                                      2021000171

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Compliance with the Commission’s corrective action is mandatory. The Agency shall submit its
compliance report within thirty (30) calendar days of the completion of all ordered corrective
action. The report shall be in the digital format required by the Commission, and submitted via
the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s report
must contain supporting documentation, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to
the Complainant. If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant
may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The
Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s
order prior to or following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the
right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below
entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for
enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42
U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be
terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                8                                       2021000171

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

 An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 9                                      2021000171

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 11, 2022
Date
