              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Mitchell G., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020004101

                                 Hearing No. 461-2019-00035X

                              Agency No. 2003-0629-2018102365

                                          DECISION

On June 9, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the
Agency’s May 13, 2020, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Associate Nurse
Executive Operations (ANEO), Nurse IV-9, at the Agency’s Southeast Louisiana Health Care
System in New Orleans, Louisiana.

On April 3, 2018, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency subjected him
to a hostile work environment and discriminated against him on the bases of national origin
(Hispanic 2/Puerto Rican) and sex (male) when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                     2020004101

       1.     in November 2015, the Associate Director of Nursing and Patient Nursing Service
              (Associate Director) 3 refused to turn over the responsibilities of the Chief Nurse
              position to Complainant;

       2.     in January 2016, Complainant became aware that the Associate Director
              instructed the Nursing Administrative Officer not to follow any instructions that
              he gave, unless the instructions were first reviewed and okayed by her;

       3.     from April through October 2016, the Associate Director held meetings with
              Complainant’s subordinate employees to discuss the same things that
              Complainant had previously met with them about;

       4.     on October 11, 2016, the Associate Director reassigned Complainant from the
              position of Chief Nurse to the position of ANEO;

       5.     in February 2017, the Associate Director assigned Complainant to conduct a job
              fair but refused to allow him to conduct interviews of applicants from the job fair;

       6.     on October 21, 2017, the Deputy Associate Director of Patient Care Services
              (Deputy) and the Associate Director denied Complainant’s request to be
              reassigned from the position of Acting Associate Nurse Executive for
              Medical/Surgical (Med/Surg) Intensive Care Unit (ICU) to being appointed as the
              Associate Nurse Executive for Med/Surg ICU;

       7.     on October 27, 2017, the Deputy informed Complainant that he was not selected
              for the position of Assistant Nurse Executive for Inpatient ICU Services;

       8.     in December 2017, the Deputy bypassed Human Resources and contacted
              Complainant’s physician to inquire about how long he would be off from work;




2
  In his formal complaint, Complainant listed his race as “Hispanic”. The Commission has
consistently held that “Hispanic” is not a race category or racial classification. Equal Emp’t.
Opportunity Comm’n. Questions and Answers about Race and Color Discrimination in
Employment (rev. Apr. 19, 2006); see also Medrano v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No.
05930569 (Dec. 16, 1993); Salais v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120082383 (Sept.
22, 2008).
3
  While the Director of Nursing and Patient Nursing Service (Director) is a listed responsible
management official (RMO), the Agency’s May 13, 2020, final decision incorrectly listed the
Director as the RMO in the various claims. The Report of Investigation appropriately listed the
claims with the correct RMO, the Associate Director of Nursing and Patient Nursing Service.
                                                 3                                     2020004101

       9.      on December 14, 2017, the Associate Director removed Complainant from the
               detailed position of Associate Nurse Executive for Inpatient ICU Services to the
               position of ANEO; and

       10.     on January 20, 2018, Complainant became aware that he was not selected for the
               position of Associate Nurse Executive for Ambulatory Care, VN-0610-00,
               advertised under Vacancy Announcement No. FE-17-SM-2014546.2

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the listed claims. The
following individuals were listed as responsible management officials: Director of Nursing and
Patient Nursing Service (Director); the Deputy; and the Associate Director. Along with the
officials that were interviewed, the EEO Investigator also interviewed seven additional
witnesses, which included: the four interview panelists for the position raised in claim 7; the
Human Resources Representative; Complainant’s subordinate employee; and the Associate
Nurse Executive (Associate Nurse). Names and positions of the relevant individuals can be
found in the Complaint File (CF) at 56-58.

Complainant was initially hired as a Chief Nurse. CF at 74. In November 2015, the Associate
Director allegedly refused to turn over all the responsibilities of the Chief Nurse position to
Complainant. Id. Complainant asserted that the Associate Director prevented him from
effectively performing his role when she refused to relinquish all responsibilities to him. CF at
75. The Associate Director stated that she has never refused to relinquish certain duties. CF at
110.

The Director was aware of Complainant’s concerns and spoke with the Associate Director. CF at
102. The Director stated that the Associate Director denied certain responsibilities because of a
“lack of competence” and that she worked with Complainant to improve competency. CF at 102.
The Director did not provide further details on what that entailed. Id.

The Associate Nurse asserted that the Associate Director refused to relinquish certain
responsibilities. CF at 361. She asserted that the Associate Director also frequently discredited
Complainant but did not detail how. Id. The Associate Nurse stated that Complainant was
assertive and verbalized his opinions regarding leadership decisions, which often led to public
arguments between him and the Associate Director. CF at 362. She was uncertain if race, or sex
individually played a factor, but believed that Complainant’s national origin combined with his
sex may have resulted in impartial treatment, though she was unsure how. CF at 361-62.

In January 2016, Complainant asserted that the Associate Director instructed the Nursing
Administrative Officer (Officer) not to follow his instructions unless they were approved by her.
CF at 76. Complainant asserted that he was left to perform his duties without any administrative
support. Id.
                                                    4                                     2020004101

The Associate Director denied the allegation. CF at 111. She stated that when Complainant was
first hired, he was informed that all his clerical duties would be taken care of primarily by the
Secretary for the Chaplain Service and by the secretary assigned to her office. CF at 112. In
approximately January or February of 2016, the Officer advised her that he was overwhelmed by
the assignments Complainant was giving him. Id. The Associate Director spoke to Complainant
and reminded him that clerical support was available through the secretaries, not the Officer. Id.
She also noted that if he needed more assistance to speak to her. Id. She informed the Officer of
this conversation and advised him to contact her if he had any other concerns. Id.

From April through October 2016, Complainant asserted that the Associate Director held
meetings with his subordinates to address matters that he had previously discussed with them.
CF at 77. Complainant stated that when he approached the Associate Director about why she did
this, she informed him that she was not ready to let go on some responsibilities. Id. The
Associate Director denied making any statements about not letting go. CF at 112. She stated that
Complainant and she had initially agreed to jointly hold meetings with the Assistant Chief
Nurses (ACN), but that it did not always happen. CF at 113. Regarding overlap, she stated that
she did not know what Complainant discussed with the employees during their meetings, but her
actions were part of her normal duties. CF at 112.

One of Complainant’s subordinate employees (Subordinate) 4 affirmed that he participated in
meetings with the Associate Director to discuss matters Complainant already talked to him
about. CF at 356. The Subordinate stated that “[m]any times, it seemed that [the Associate
Director] wanted to dispute any recommendations or suggestions that [Complainant] made.” CF
at 357. He is uncertain that race, sex or national origin were motives in the matter. Id. The
Subordinate asserted that the Associate Director was hostile towards Complainant, and that “[i]t
was well known that she did not want to relinquish any control to the Nurse Executive. She
remanded many of his directives and screamed at him in front of the rest of the team.” Id.

The Associate Nurse affirmed that the Associate Director took the alleged actions against
Complainant. CF at 363. She noted that the Associate Director would hold meetings with
Complainant’s subordinates to discuss his performance. Id. “It was clear through [the Associate
Director’s] statements and actions that her ultimate goal was (sic) remove [Complainant] from
the Chief Nurse position.” Id. However, she was uncertain that race, sex or national origin were
motives in the matter.

On October 11, 2016, the Associate Director reassigned Complainant from the position of Chief
Nurse to the position of ANEO, his current role. The reassignment did not result in a change of
pay or departments but did result in the removal of Complainant’s supervisory responsibilities.
CF at 78. He explained that the Associate Director created the ANEO position, and then posted
for a Deputy Associate Director of Patient Care Services (Deputy Associate Director) position.
Id. Complainant brought the issue of his reassignment to the Director, who informed him that it
was the Associate Director’s decision. Id. Complainant believed that the Associate Director


4
    This witness’s position is not detailed in the record. His affidavit can be found at CF at 355.
                                                5                                    2020004101

reassigned him so that she could hire an African American female that she knew for the new role
of Deputy Associate Director. CF at 80.

The Associate Director asserted that the reassignment was due to the opening of a new facility,
which needed an operations-based position like an ANEO. CF at 113. Based on organizational
efficiency, she determined that Complainant’s original position as a Chief Nurse would be
abolished. CF at 114. The Associate Director stated that supervisory responsibilities were
removed due to the need and creation of the ANEO position, which did not require supervision
of staff. CF at 115. She confirmed that other employees had their titles changed with their duties
remaining the same. Id. She denied reassigning Complainant in order to remove his supervisory
authority. Id.

In February 2017, the Associate Director assigned Complainant to conduct a job fair but
allegedly refused his request to conduct interviews. CF at 80. The Associate Director denied this
allegation. CF at 115. She stated that it was common practice for the departments to hire staff
within their own units. The Associate Director also noted that the role of their department that
day was only site management. CF at 116. The HR Representative testified that the Associate
Director informed her that Complainant was not allowed to interview job fair applicants. CF at
193. However, she also affirmed that it was standard practice for departments to hire their own
staff. CF at 194.

On October 21, 2017, the Deputy and the Associate Director denied Complainant’s request to be
reassigned from acting to permanent Associate Nurse Executive for the Med/Surg ICU.
Complainant requested the permanent reassignment as he felt he was performing it successfully
in his acting capacity. CF at 81. The Associate Director denied refusing the reassignment based
on Complainant’s protected bases and asserted that the fulfillment of the position was through
Human Resources (HR) in a competitive process. CF at 116.

On October 27, 2017, the Deputy informed Complainant that he was not selected for the position
of Assistant Nurse Executive for Inpatient ICU Services. The Associate Director was not
involved in the interview process and accepted the recommendation of the selectee (Selectee1),
who was referred to the Deputy by the interview panel. CF at 118; 133. Complainant asserted
that he was qualified and interviewed well, and that the decision was based on his protected
classes. CF at 83-87. Complainant noted that Selectee1 (African American, United States,
female) was outside of his protected classes. Selectee1 scored a total of 158 cumulative points,
which encompassed the interview and resume scores, whereas Complainant scored 132 points.
CF at 121; 136; 289; 292.

Members of the interview panel had no working relationship with Complainant. The Chairperson
for the interview panel stated that Complainant’s qualifications were assessed and while he was
qualified, he “…was not the strongest applicant base (sic) on his responses to the interview
questions and scoring from the panel members.” CF at 151; 153. The Chief Nurse stated that
Complainant did not answer questions completely and that this factored into the low score that
he issued Complainant. CF at 169.
                                                  6                                      2020004101

In December 2017, the Deputy sent Complainant an email notifying him that she contacted his
physician regarding his time off from work. CF at 88. The Deputy stated that the call was
prompted by a letter from Complainant’s physician that stated that Complainant would be away
from work but did not specify the length of time. CF at 139. Complainant reported the incident to
the Privacy Officer. CF at 89. The Privacy Officer investigated the incident and interviewed the
Deputy and Complainant’s physician to discern what was discussed. CF at 346.The Deputy
stated that Complainant served in a pivotal role and not knowing the length of his absence would
hinder operations. CF at 139. Since the note provided a contact number for questions, she called
to find out the length of absence, and nothing more. Id. The Privacy Officer determined that no
protected health information was discussed, and that the Deputy’s inquiry was limited to how
long Complainant would be absent. CF at 346. As such, the Privacy Officer concluded that there
were no violations. Id.

On December 14, 2017, the Associate Director removed Complainant from the detailed position
of Associate Nurse Executive for Inpatient ICU Services and back to his original position of
ANEO. CF at 89. There was no change in his department or pay, but Complainant felt under-
valued, demeaned, harassed and discriminated against by the action. CF at 89-90. The Associate
Director stated that Complainant’s detail ended, and he was returned to his original position. CF
at 125.

On January 20, 2018, Complainant became aware that he was not selected for the position of
Associate Nurse Executive for Ambulatory Care, VN-0610-00, advertised under Vacancy
Announcement No. FE-17-SM-2014546.2. CF at 91. The announcement was later closed without
selection. Another vacancy later opened, and Complainant asserted that the selectee (Selectee2)
(African American, United States, female) was preselected and hired. CF at 95. Complainant
acknowledged that Selectee2 was a qualified nurse, but believed he was better qualified. CF at
95-96.

The Associate Director stated that she reviewed the recommendations from HR and that
Complainant’s name was not listed. CF at 125. She denied not selecting Complainant based on
his protected classes. CF at 129. The Deputy was the selecting official for the position and stated
that she made the selection based on HR’s recommendation. CF at 141-42.

The HR Representative requested that a HR Contract Specialist 5 announce the job, review the
applicants and refer the candidates to the Deputy and the Associate Director. CF at 181-82. A
Certificate of Referral (Certificate) was sent to the officials on November 17, 2017. CF at 198.
Complainant applied on November 28, 2017, if he had qualified, his name would not have been
included due to timing. CF at 186. When asked why the Certificate was sent prior to the
announcement closing date, the HR Representative stated that the hospital was newly opened,
needed the position filled, and as a general practice, a list of referrals is typically sent within 15-
20 days to the selecting official. Id.


5
  The EEO Investigator requested the name and contact information for this individual but HR
did not provide it during the investigation.
                                                7                                     2020004101

Upon receiving this first set, the Deputy chose to close the position as none of the applicants met
the facility patient care need. CF at 188. The position was later re-announced and Selectee2 was
chosen CF at 187-88.

The Associate Nurse was not involved in the job selection but “observed individuals who were
placed in positions or directly hired for competitive positions due to their past
relationships/association with [the Associate Director].” CF at 364. However, she stated that she
had no knowledge whether the non-selection was motivated by Complainant’s protected classes.
CF at 365. Id. Still, she believed that Selectee2 was preselected because she was African
American and knew the Associate Director. She asserted that Selectee2 did not have the
experience to assume the responsibilities of the role and yet was still hired. Id.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant initially requested a hearing. Upon receipt of the AJ’s
proposed summary judgment in favor of the Agency, Complainant withdrew his hearing request.
Per Complainant’s request, on September 11, 2019, the AJ issued an order of dismissal and
remanded the matter to the Agency for a final Agency decision (FAD).

On May 13, 2020, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant states that he is requesting an appeal on the grounds that witness
testimony did not appear to be considered in the FAD. Complainant did not specify which
witness(es) he was referring to and what those potential witnesses might add to the complaint.

In response, the Agency asserts that Complainant failed to meet his burden of proof below or on
appeal. The Agency states that the record contains the testimony of several witnesses, which was
reviewed and considered. The Agency stands by its FAD and requests that the Commission
affirm the decision.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
                                               8                                    2020004101

parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                     ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Complaint Processing

We note that Complainant raised concerns with the processing of his complaint on appeal.
Specifically, Complainant asserts that the FAD was inadequate because it appeared that witness
testimony was not considered in the FAD. Complainant also indicated that it was possible not all
witnesses were interviewed. However, Complainant made this generalized statement without
providing more information, such as the kind of testimony, or the individuals he was referencing.

To the extent that Complainant is asserting that there were inadequacies due to a lack of certain
witness testimony, the Commission, upon review of the entire record is not persuaded that the
investigation into Complainant's complaint was incomplete or improper.

Disparate Treatment

Complainant alleges that he was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment
is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438
U.S. 567 (1978).        The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate
responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency
acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we find
that the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.

In claim 4, the Associate Director reassigned Complainant from his originally hired position of
Chief Nurse to his current position due to the impacts of a newly opened facility.
                                                9                                    2020004101

The record demonstrated that the reassignment was based on the new facility needing an
operations-based position. Upon a review of the organizational chart, management determined
that it would be best to abolish the Chief Nurse position in favor of creating the Associate Nurse
Executive Operations position, which did not encompass the need for direct supervision of staff.
Complainant argued that this reasoning was pretext for removing his supervisory authority based
on his protected classes. While the reassignment did result in Complainant losing supervisory
authority, he has not provided any evidence that the reassignment was motivated by his protected
classes. Complainant argued that others were able to maintain their roles with only changes to
titles. However, those individuals were not comparable as they functioned in different capacities.

In claim 6, Complainant argued that the Associate Director discriminatorily denied his
reassignment request to be permanently appointed as the Associate Nurse Executive for the
Med/Surg ICU. Here, the record demonstrated that Complainant was serving in an acting role
with the official fulfillment of the position through HR in a competitive process. There is no
evidence that the Associate Director, or any other management official, had an impact on who
ultimately fulfilled the position. Complainant argued that he was denied based on his protected
classes but aside from the blanket assertion, did not provide any evidence to support his
contention.

In claim 9, Complainant argued that the Associate Director discriminatorily removed him from
the detailed position of Associate Nurse Executive for Inpatient ICU Services and back to his
original position of ANEO. The Agency provided that Complainant’s detail had ended and that
for operational management, Complainant was returned to his original position. It was clear that
Complainant wanted to stay, but his assertion that management did not approve of an extension
or permeant position due to discriminatory motives is not supported by the record.

As the employer, the Agency has broad discretion to determine how best to manage its
operations and may make decisions, including personnel decisions such as details and
assignments, on any basis except a basis that is unlawful under the discrimination statutes. See
Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978); Burdine 450 U.S. at 253. An
employer is entitled to make its own business judgments. The reasonableness of the employer's
decision may, of course, be probative of whether it is pretext. Therefore, our analysis focuses on
the Agency's motivation, not its business judgment. Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d 1003, 1012
n.6 (1st Cir. 1979). In other words, it is not the function of this Commission to substitute its
judgment for that of management officials who are familiar with the needs of their facility, and
who are in a better position to make decisions, unless other facts suggest that proscribed
considerations of bias entered the decision-making process. See Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin.,
EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996), citing Bauer v. Bailar, 647 F.2d 1037, 1048 (10th
Cir. 1981).

In this matter, Complainant failed to provide sufficient arguments, below or on appeal, that the
reasons provided by the Agency were false and merely pretext for discrimination. The incidents
described demonstrate routine business matters.
                                                10                                    2020004101

Based on the record, there is no evidence to demonstrate that management’s actions in such
matters were motivated by discriminatory animus.

Non-Selections – Claims 7 and 10

Regarding the non-selections, Complainant can demonstrate pretext by showing that his
qualifications for the position were plainly superior to those of the various selectees. Hung P. v.
Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141721 (Dec. 3, 2015). Other indicators of
pretext include discriminatory statements or past personal treatment attributable to those
responsible for the personnel action that led to the filing of the complaint, comparative or
statistical data revealing differences in treatment across various protected-group lines, unequal
application of Agency policy, deviations from standard procedures without explanation or
justification, or inadequately explained inconsistencies in the evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12, 2015).

Regarding claim 7, Complainant asserted that he was not selected based on his protected classes.
Based on the record, we find that the Agency has provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons
for his non-selection. Specifically, the panel recommended that Selectee1 be chosen based on an
overall score that encompassed resume review and the interview. Complainant argued that he
was superior to Selectee1. However, he has failed to provide any documentation or evidence that
demonstrated that his qualifications for were plainly superior to those of Selectee1, nor did he
provide evidence to demonstrate that the Agency’s articulated reasons were pretext for
discriminatory non-selection.

In claim 10, both Complainant and the Associate Nurse felt that Selectee2 was not the best
qualified and/or was inappropriately preselected. However, other than a generalized belief,
neither individual provided detailed information to support such assertions. The Commission has
previously determined that agencies have broad discretion to choose among equally qualified
candidates as long as the selection is not based on unlawful considerations. Lashawna L. v.
Envtl. Prot. Agency, EEOC Appeal No. 2019000124 (Mar. 8, 2019). Agencies may
even preselect a candidate as long as the preselection is not premised upon a prohibited
basis. Michael R. v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120172112 (Nov. 29, 2018).

In reviewing matters such as hiring and promotions, the Commission cannot second-guess such
personnel decisions unless there is evidence of a discriminatory motivation on the part of the
officials responsible for making those decisions. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S.
248, 259 (1981). For the reasons discussed above, we find that Complainant has failed to
demonstrate that discriminatory animus based on his protected classes were the real reasons for
his non-selections in claims 7 and 10.
                                                11                                    2020004101


Medical Inquiry – Claim 8

As a preliminary matter, we note that the Agency discussed claim 8 in terms of harassment.
However, as it involved a claim of improper medical inquiry, the Commission determined that it
was best analyzed through the lens of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

Under the Rehabilitation Act, employers may make disability-related inquires or
require medical examinations of employees only if they are job related and consistent with
business necessity. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.13(b), 1630.14(c). “Generally, a disability-
related inquiry or medical examination of an employee may be ‘job related and consistent with
business necessity’ when an employer “has a reasonable belief, based on objective evidence,
that: (1) an employee's ability to perform essential job functions will be impaired by a medical
condition; or (2) an employee will pose a direct threat due to a medical condition.”' Enforcement
Guidance on Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical Examinations of Employees Under the
ADA (July 27, 2000) (Enforcement Guidance on Employee Inquiries and Examinations) at Q. 5.
“Direct threat” means a significant risk of substantial harm that cannot be eliminated or reduced
by reasonable accommodation. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r). “An employer is entitled only to the
information necessary to determine whether the employee can do the essential functions of the
job or work without posing a direct threat.” Enforcement Guidance on Employee Inquiries and
Examinations at Q. 13.

It is the burden of the employer to show that its disability-related inquiries are job-related and
consistent with business necessity. See Solomon B. v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120162325 (Jan. 25, 2018) (citing Complainant v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120060363 (Oct. 9, 2007)). In this situation, the Deputy contacted Complainant’s physician
only to discern the length of time that he would be absent for work. The record demonstrates that
the Deputy made the inquiry out of business necessity considering Complainant’s role in the
Agency. Based on the record, we do not find a violation of the Rehabilitation Act when the
Deputy inquired the length of Complainant’s absence.

However, we remind the Agency that all disability-related inquiries and medical examinations of
employees must be job related and consistent with business necessity. See Enforcement
Guidance on Employee Inquiries and Examinations at Q. 11. We strongly encourage the Agency
to ensure that all supervisors and managers are aware of their responsibilities under the
Rehabilitation Act and that they adhere to the Act's requirements. Sacha K. v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120170288 (July 19, 2018).

Hostile Work Environment

In considering whether any of the actions listed by Complainant, whether individually or
collectively, constitute harassment, the Commission notes that in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc.,
510 U.S. 17 (1993), the Supreme Court reaffirmed the holding of Meritor Savings Bank v.
                                                12                                    2020004101

Vinson, 477 U.S. 57 (1986), that harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive
that it results in an alteration of the conditions of the complainant’s employment. See EEOC
Notice No. 915.002 (March 8, 1994), Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc.
at 3. To establish a claim of harassment a complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to a
statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to unwelcome verbal or physical conduct; (3) the
harassment complained of was based on a statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment had the
purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with his work performance and/or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See McCleod v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 01963810 (Aug.
5, 1999) (citing Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982)).

We note that with regard to retaliatory harassment, Complainant only needs to show that such
actions are the type of action that would dissuade a reasonable employee from making or
supporting a charge of discrimination. See Burlington Northern & Santa Fe Railroad. Co. v.
White, 548 U. S. 53 (2006); see also EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related
Issues, No. 915.004 (Aug. 25, 2016); Carroll v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Request No.
05970939 (Apr. 4, 2000).

We note that a finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that
Complainant failed to establish that the Agency was motivated by discriminatory animus in
claims 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept.
21, 2000).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established parts 1 and 2 of a prima facie case of
harassment, we find that based on the record Complainant has not met the requirements of parts
3 and 4. In order to prevail, a complainant must provide more than just generalized allegations
of harassment. See Alise A. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2019005036 (July 20, 2021)
(complainant alleged that her coworker frequently disparaged her and initiated a verbal and
physical altercation due to her protected classes. However, complainant failed to provide
evidence beyond her own conclusory statements. Sympathetic witness statements attested that
complainant and the coworker had a contentious relationship but did not connect such conflict to
the complainant’s protected classes). Ultimately, conclusory statements of harassment, without
more, will not support a complainant’s claim of actions constituted harassment or that the events
occurred because of Complainant’s protected bases.

In support of his claim, Complainant provided several examples where he asserted that he was
harassed, particularly by the Associate Director. For example, he asserted that the Associate
Director refused to relinquish certain duties to him (claim 1); that she instructed the Officer to
not follow his instructions (claim 2); that she held duplicative and undermining meetings with his
subordinates (claims 3); and that she undermined and undervalued him when she refused to
allow him to conduct interviews during a job fair (claim 5). In reviewing these claims, we
acknowledge the supportive statements that the Subordinate, the Associate Nurse, and the HR
Representative provided. However, the statements provided merely demonstrated a generally
contentious relationship between Complainant and the Associate Director.
                                                  13                                2020004101

None of the statements presented connected the Associate Director’s actions and/or alleged
hostility with Complainant’s protected classes.

We also acknowledge that in certain instances, the testimony of the Associate Director is
questionable, such as in claim 1, when she denied refusing to relinquish certain duties to
Complainant. In that claim, the Associate Director’s testimony was in conflict of the testimonies
provided by the Director and the Associate Nurse. However, even if we view the facts in favor of
Complainant, the record does not demonstrate that the Associate Director’s actions were
motivated by Complainant’s protected classes. Overall, aside from his conclusory statements that
the Associate Director, and/or other management officials targeted and harassed him,
Complainant has provided no evidence to support such claims.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed or referenced herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
                                                14                                    2020004101

to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 15                                     2020004101

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 4, 2022
Date
