             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Luvenia S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                   Isabel Casillas Guzman,
                                        Administrator,
                                 Small Business Administration,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020003753

                                     Agency No. 08-18-075

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s April 15, 2020, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
(ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Human Resources
Specialist at the Agency’s Organizational Effectiveness Division, Office of the Chief Human
Capital Officer in Washington, D.C.

Complainant stated that she was out of the office due to glioblastoma multiform brain cancer
(GMB), and that when she returned to work in November 2015, she was provided the ability to
telework as a reasonable accommodation. 2


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  Complainant’s husband informed the EEO Investigator that Complainant lost her “executive
functions” and was unable to provide an affidavit or documents. ROI Exhibit E1. As such,
                                               2                                   2020003753

Complainant averred that throughout 2016 and 2017, she and her management officials
discussed her medical condition and need for accommodations. Complainant claimed that in
October 2017, she was denied her reasonable accommodation request for Computer/Electronic
Accommodation Program (CAP or CAPTEC) equipment. Complainant stated that in December
2017, she provided medical documentation to her first-line supervisor (S1) (age 52, no
disability), who requested updated medical documentation in March 2018 and June 2018, despite
no changes to Complainant’s condition. Report of Investigation (ROI) Exhibit A1 at 6-7.

S1 stated that Complainant received an unacceptable performance rating for fiscal year 2016, and
she was placed on a performance improvement plan (PIP) on June 27, 2017. S1 Affidavit at 32-
3, 36. On October 12, 2017, S1 issued Complainant a Letter of Warning for sleeping on the job.
S1 noted that she had previously verbally counseled Complainant for sleeping, and that it was
S1’s expectation that Complainant not sleep. ROI Exhibit D7 at 70-1.

Complainant averred that on or about August 9, 2018, S1 issued her a proposed suspension, and
that she requested an extension to respond to the proposal. Complainant claimed that as of
August 22, 2018, she had not received a response to her two extension requests. ROI Exhibit A1
at 7. S1 stated that Complainant retired in November 2018. S1 Affidavit at 85.

On December 14, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
her to discrimination and harassment on the bases of disability (GMB) and age (63), and in
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity (requesting a reasonable accommodation), when:

   1. as of August 22, 2018, Complainant’s two requests for extensions to respond to her Letter
      of Proposed Suspension had not been addressed;

   2. on or about August 9, 2018, Complainant received a Notice of Proposed Suspension
      related to her disability and treatment for disability;

   3. in March and June 2018, management repeatedly requested updates regarding
      Complainant’s medical condition;

   4. on October 12, 2017, Complainant received a Letter of Warning for activities related to
      her disability;

   5. on or around October 2017, Complainant was denied her reasonable accommodation
      request for CAPTEC equipment to help her accomplish her work;

   6. during fiscal year 2017, Complainant was placed on a PIP, despite being granted some
      reasonable accommodations and those accommodations were not taken into proper
      consideration; and


Complainant’s statements are from her formal EEO complaint and other documents in the
record.
                                                3                                     2020003753

   7. since on or about November 2015, Complainant was granted a reasonable
      accommodation and was able to work from home, but the accommodation was
      terminated at a later date.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the ROI
and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge. In
accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b).

The Agency found that Complainant did not establish that she was subjected to an adverse action
for claim 1 because she was not denied a term, condition, or privilege of employment; and she
did not make two extension requests. The Agency then found that Complainant established a
prima facie case of discrimination based on age and disability, and in reprisal for prior protected
EEO activity, for claims 2, 4, and 6, and that management officials provided legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for their actions. The Agency determined that Complainant did not
show that the reasons were pretexts for discrimination.

For claim 3, the Agency found that S1 made several requests for Complainant’s medical
documentation to address Complainant’s need for accommodations based on current assessments
of Complainant’s limitations, which was part of the interactive process and necessary given
Complainant’s demonstrated failure to accomplish the essential functions of her position with her
current accommodations. Regarding claim 5, the Agency determined that S1 stated that
Complainant’s CAPTEAC request was never denied. Rather, S1 provided Complainant with the
necessary paperwork, and Complainant set up an assessment but failed to take necessary action
to obtain the equipment. The Agency also determined that there was never a point when fulltime
telework was not available to Complainant, who came into the office on her own volition.

The Agency further found that Complainant did not establish that she was harassed because the
allegedly discriminatory events were not motivated by unlawful discrimination, and none of the
actions, either individually or collectively, could be considered severe or pervasive enough to
establish a hostile work environment. The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that she was subjected to discrimination or harassment as alleged.

Complainant filed the instant appeal and submitted a brief in support of her appeal. The Agency
opposed Complainant’s appeal.
                                                4                                     2020003753

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant’s Contentions

As an initial matter, Complainant states that she is not asking the Commission to consider her
age discrimination claim or claim 1. 3 Through her attorney, Complainant argues that the record
is insufficient because it is missing important documents and evidence. For example,
Complainant notes that the PIP; a copy of the initial decision granting a reasonable
accommodation; and a December 8, 2017 letter from Complainant’s doctor were not included in
the ROI. Complainant asserts that, by failing to include highly relevant documents and evidence,
the Agency failed to conduct an impartial and appropriate factual record. To the extent that
Complainant has these documents in her possession, she provides them on appeal.

Regarding the proposed suspension, Complainant asserts that S1 knew that the stated charges
were a direct result of her medical condition and/or the medication. Complainant also argues that
S1 wrote that she took into consideration mitigating factors, but she only considered one
mitigating factor of Complainant’s years of service and failed to consider other mitigating
factors, such as Complainant’s past work performance. Complainant states that she could not
control her falling asleep, nor could she always understand and follow directions or stop herself
from engaging in behavior that was off-putting to some. Complainant also argues that, with the
issuance of the notice of proposed suspension, this single incident alone is a viable claim for a
hostile environment.

Complainant asserts that she was retaliated against, discriminated against, and subjected to a
hostile work environment when S1 repeatedly requested that Complainant provide additional
medical document regarding her disability. Complainant argues that the requests for more
personal medical documentation were in direct contravention of the EEOC’s Enforcement
Guidance, which states that an employer cannot ask for documentation when the individual has
already provided the employer with sufficient information to substantiate that she has a disability
and needs the reasonable accommodation requested. Complainant states that the Agency noted
that the frequency of these requests for medical documentation “depends on the pace of the
change in the employee’s medical condition,” and that very little changed in Complainant’s
medical condition, which generally only gets worse, not better.

Complainant argues that the Agency failed to follow up with the CAP program office regarding
the assessment that was done for Complainant and that, therefore, she never received any CAP
equipment to help her accomplish her work. Complainant asserts that it was not her
responsibility to follow up after the assessment was performed, and that instead, it was the
responsibility of the CAP program office or other agency officials to follow up.




3
  The Commission will not address claim 1 or Complainant’s claim of age discrimination in the
instant decision based on her withdrawal of these claims on appeal.
                                               5                                    2020003753

Complainant also argues that the Agency did not engage in interactive discussions to discuss the
accommodations of memory aids, or alternatively, suggest a reassignment to a different, and
perhaps, lower-level position.

Complainant argues that S1’s actions in subjecting Complainant to two PIPs had no legitimate
purpose, and that Complainant’s “inability to meet expectations was not discretionary,” and that
she does not dispute that she had issues performing her work. Complainant requests that the
Commission vacate the Agency’s final decision and remand this case to the Agency, either with
instructions to issue a new decision in her favor, or to conduct a supplemental investigation.

Agency Contentions

The Agency asserts that the record was adequately developed, and a supplemental investigation
is improper because there is sufficient information in the record. Specifically, the ROI contains
four witness affidavits and the rebuttal statement by Complainant’s husband, in addition to
numerous evidentiary exhibits. The Agency concedes that there are missing documents, but it
argues the ROI contains sufficient evidence to allow a factfinder to determine whether the
Agency discriminated against Complainant. In addition, Complainant had an opportunity to
participate in the investigation and provide documents to the EEO Investigator, but she did not
do so. Further, the Agency asserts that the missing documentation that Complainant provided on
appeal does not provide any information that suggests, had the documentation been in the ROI,
the findings would have been different.

The Agency argues that it made the correct decision in its final decision in finding that
Complainant did not show by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination or retaliation. The Agency contends that management officials provided
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for issuing the PIPs, the Letter of Warning, and the
proposed suspension; and that Complainant did not establish pretext and rebut the Agency’s
legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons.

The Agency asserts that it granted Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request of fulltime
telework in November 2015, which was in place until her retirement in November 2018.
Regarding claim 5, the Agency notes that on July 10, 2017, Complainant had a CAPTEC
assessment done, and she was provided specific instructions on how to submit a request for the
equipment discussed: “To submit this request, please check first with your Supervisor or your
Agency’s CAP POC, if applicable, to follow the correct next steps. You can use the below link to
start your Online Request.” After Complainant completed the assessment, S1 advised
Complainant to “submit the paperwork to the Agency’s Office of Civil Rights and Diversity and
Inclusion,” but instead of timely following the instructions in July 2017, Complainant did not
provide the paperwork until the end of September 2017, and by that point, the fiscal year 2017
CAP spending had been cut off.
                                               6                                   2020003753

The Agency states that in March and June 2018, S1 sought updated medical information because
Complainant was failing to perform the essential job functions with her current accommodations
and the Agency sought to reinstate Complainant’s CAPTEC request. The Agency notes that
Complainant fails to mention the March and June 2018 requests on appeal, and suggests that,
because she provided medical documentation in 2015 and 2016, it was improper for the Agency
to request any additional documentation because Complainant’s disability and need for
reasonable accommodations was obvious and sufficient documentation was already provided.
However, the Agency asserts that employers are permitted to request updated medical
documentation when there is evidence that an employee’s condition or need for the
accommodation has changed, or when an employee has a reasonable accommodation that is no
longer effective.

The Agency notes that it was not clear if Complainant submitted any medical documents in
March 2018. S1 stated that Complainant did not always provide the requested medical
information or resubmitted the same medical documentation previously provided. In addition,
S1’s request for medical information in June 2018 stated that Complainant’s most recent medical
documentation from December 2017 recommended that Complainant work from home on a
fulltime basis, but that S1 did not believe that fulltime telework was appropriate based on
continued issues with errors in Complainant’s work. The Agency requests that the Commission
affirm its final decision finding no discrimination or harassment.

                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Report of Investigation

As an initial matter, Complainant argues that the record is insufficient because it is missing
important documents and evidence, such as copies of her PIP; the initial decision granting her
reasonable accommodation; and a December 8, 2017 letter from Complainant’s doctor. EEOC
regulation states that an agency shall develop an impartial and appropriate factual record upon
which to make findings on the claims raised by the written complaint. An appropriate factual
record is one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw conclusions as to whether
discrimination occurred.
                                                 7                                     2020003753

Agencies may use an exchange of letters or memoranda, interrogatories, investigations, fact-
finding conferences or any other fact-finding methods that efficiently and thoroughly address the
matters at issue. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b). Upon review of the record, we find that it contains
sufficient information to make a determination on Complainant’s discrimination and harassment
claims. Despite missing documents, we find that the responsible management officials responded
to Complainant’s allegations, and that any evidence that was missing from the record does not
change the determination that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination or harassment based on her disability, or in reprisal for her prior protected EEO
activity. As such, we decline to grant Complainant’s request to remand the complaint for a
supplemental investigation.

Reasonable Accommodation

In order to establish that Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant
must show that: (1) she is an individual with a disability; (2) she is a qualified individual with a
disability; and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC
Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the
Americans with Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (Enforcement
Guidance). “The term ‘qualified,’ with respect to an individual with a disability, means that the
individual satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements
of the employment position such individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable
accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).
An agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical and mental
limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the Agency can show that
accommodation would cause an undue hardship. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o), (p).

Assuming, for the purpose of analysis and without so finding, that Complainant is a qualified
individual with a disability, we find that the Agency did not fail to accommodate Complainant.
For claim 7, S1 stated that Complainant was approved to telework fulltime; take extended breaks
throughout the day; extend her workday to make up time for appointments or breaks; and the
flexibility to start her workday as late as 9:00 a.m. S1 averred that, while Complainant was
approved to telework fulltime, she only teleworked occasionally and came into the office
because she claimed that it was easier to get assistance with computer issues or her assignments.
S1 affirmed that she never retracted the telework accommodation, but it appeared that fulltime
telework was not sufficient. S1 stated that she also modified Complainant’s tasks in accordance
with her medical information and gave Complainant one assignment at a time. S1 Affidavit at
21-3, 27.

Regarding claim 5, Complainant argues that it was not her responsibility to follow up after the
CAP assessment was performed, and that instead, it was the responsibility of the CAP program
office or other Agency officials to follow up. However, the record shows that CAP instructed
Complainant to check with her supervisor and then utilize an included link to initiate her online
request on July 10, 2017, and that Complainant did not forward the CAP assessment until
September 26, 2017. ROI Exhibit D5 at 11.
                                                8                                    2020003753

S1 claimed that she learned in October 2017 that CAP had closed Complainant’s request due to
inaction. S1 averred that in February 2018, they set a meeting to discuss renewing Complainant’s
CAP request, but Complainant did not attend the meeting and explained that she forgot. S1
Affidavit at 46-7, 50. Here, Complainant simply shifts responsibility onto CAP and Agency
officials; however, the record shows that Complainant did not forward her July 2017 CAP
assessment until the end of September 2017, which prevented the Agency from acting upon the
recommended accommodations from CAP in a timely manner.

Complainant also argues that the Agency did not engage in interactive discussions to discuss the
accommodations of memory aids, or alternatively, suggest a reassignment to a different position.
However, S1 stated that in response to Complainant’s memory issues, they tried a notebook,
which Complainant then lost. S1 Affidavit at 28. Regarding a reassignment search, the
Commission has long held that reassignment is the reasonable accommodation of last resort and
is required only after it has been determined that there are no effective accommodations that will
enable Complainant to perform the essential functions of her current position, or all other
reasonable accommodations would impose an undue hardship. See Enforcement Guidance. In
this case, the record shows that S1 was still attempting to identify additional effective
accommodations by requesting updated medical information in March and June 2018, and that
the Agency did not determine that there were no more possible accommodations for
Complainant to perform the essential functions of her current position. We also note that
Complainant did not present evidence showing that she asked the Agency to consider a
reassignment as an accommodation. As such, we find that Complainant did not establish that the
Agency failed to provide reasonable accommodations.

Complainant alleged that S1 acted improperly when she repeatedly requested updates regarding
her medical condition in March and June 2018, because the EEOC’s Enforcement Guidance
states that an employer cannot ask for documentation when the individual has already provided
the employer with sufficient information to substantiate that she has a disability and needs the
reasonable accommodation requested. However, S1 stated that accommodations for telework
have an expiration date, and that she requested updated medical documentation at the time of
renewal; and they were also trying to reinitiate Complainant’s CAP request. In addition, S1
averred that fulltime telework was not enabling Complainant to perform the essential functions
of her position, and she was trying to find an accommodation that would help Complainant
perform her duties. S1 Affidavit at 60, 63.

While we note that the record is not clear if Complainant provided the requested documentation
in March 2018, we find that S1’s requests in March and June 2018 were part of the ongoing
interactive process for the Agency’s obligation to provide effective accommodations for
Complainant. On June 5, 2018, S1 informed Complainant that she believed that the granted
accommodation of fulltime telework was no longer effective based on Complainant’s work
errors and missed deadlines, and she requested updated medical information to determine what
reasonable accommodation would be most effective. ROI Affidavit Exhibit D16 at 2-5.
Accordingly, we find that Complainant did not establish that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination when it requested additional medical information.
                                                9                                     2020003753

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). She must generally establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that she was
subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference
of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). The prima facie
inquiry may be dispensed with in this case, however, since the Agency has articulated legitimate
and nondiscriminatory reasons for its conduct. See U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens,
460 U.S. 711, 713-17 (1983); Holley v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 05950842
(Nov. 13, 1997). To ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson
Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502,
519 (1993); Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981); Holley, supra;
Pavelka v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05950351 (Dec. 14, 1995).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on
disability, and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity, we find that the Agency proffered
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. For claim 2, S1 stated that she issued a
proposed suspension to Complainant for sleeping on duty; unacceptable behavior; and failure to
follow instructions. S1 noted that there were five specifications of sleeping on duty. S1 also
provided examples of Complainant’s unacceptable behavior, including a time when Complainant
left work to attend a baseball game, without requesting leave or notifying S1. When S1 requested
a written explanation for Complainant’s unauthorized absence to attend the baseball game,
Complainant failed to follow instructions when she did not respond. S1 Affidavit at 66, 70, 74-6.

Regarding claim 4, S1 claimed that she issued a Letter of Warning because Complainant was
observed sleeping at her desk around 11:20 a.m. on October 12, 2017. S1 stated that she received
multiple written statements from witnesses who had seen Complainant sleeping. S1 Affidavit at
53-4. For claim 6, S1 averred that Complainant was placed on a PIP due to her unacceptable
performance, which was rated a “one” and Complainant needed to demonstrate performance at a
level of “two” or higher to pass the PIP. S1 stated that the PIP was initiated in June 2017, but as
of October 2017, Complainant had not delivered any complete assignments. S1 added that she
placed Complainant on a new PIP in fiscal year 2018, and they started again. S1 Affidavit at 31-
8.

We find that Complainant has not shown that the proffered reasons were pretexts for
discrimination. Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such weaknesses, inconsistencies, or
contradictions in the Agency’s proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. See Opare-Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007) (finding that the agency’s explanations were
confusing, contradictory, and lacking credibility, which were then successfully rebutted by the
complainant), request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520080211 (May 30, 2008).
                                                10                                    2020003753

For the proposed suspension, Complainant contends that S1 maintained that she took into
consideration mitigating factors, but only considered one mitigating factor of Complainant’s
years of service and failed to consider other mitigating factors, such as Complainant’s past work
performance. However, a review of the proposal shows that S1 listed Complainant’s years of
service as an example of the mitigating factors, and that S1 ultimately determined that the
seriousness of the allegations and the aggravating factors outweighed the mitigating factors. ROI
Exhibit D7 at 3-4.

Complainant argues that S1’s actions were discriminatory because Complainant’s actions were
directly a result of her medical condition and/or the medication. However, Complainant did not
provide any evidence showing that S1’s proffered reasons were not worthy of belief; and we note
that Complainant did not dispute the incidents that were included in the discipline or that she had
issues performing her work. Complainant further stated on appeal that she could not control
falling asleep, nor could she always understand and follow directions or stop herself from
engaging in behavior that was off-putting to some. The record also contains the employee reports
of Complainant sleeping and complaints regarding her behavior. ROI Exhibit D7 at 19-31.

In addition, the Commission has found that an employer is not required to excuse past
misconduct even if it is the result of the individual’s disability. See Jordan v. Dep’t of the
Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 0120055250 (Dec. 28, 2006). Here, Complainant’s bare assertions
that S1 discriminated against her are insufficient to prove pretext or that her actions were
discriminatory. Accordingly, we find that Complainant did not establish that the Agency
discriminated against her based on her disability, or in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity,
when it issued her a proposed suspension, a Letter of Warning, and PIPs.

Harassment

As discussed above, we found that Complainant did not establish a case of discrimination on any
of her alleged bases. Further, we conclude that a case of harassment is precluded based on our
finding that Complainant did not establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were
motivated by her protected bases. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923
(Sept. 21, 2000). Accordingly, we find that Complainant did not show that the Agency subjected
her to harassment based on her disability, or in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding that Complainant
did not establish that the Agency subjected her to discrimination or harassment based on
disability, or in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity.
                                                  11                                2020003753

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                12                                    2020003753

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 14, 2021
Date
