              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                             Eva M, 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                       Christine Wormuth,
                                            Secretary,
                                     Department of the Army,
                                             Agency.

                                    Request No. 2022000239

                                     Appeal No. 2020002870

                                 Hearing No. 570-2016-01362X

                              Agency No. ARHQOSA15OCT04327

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020002870 (September 9, 2021).
EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a Contract Specialist, GS-1102-11, at the
Agency’s Military Training Mission, Eskan Military Base, in Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, claiming discrimination and a hostile work environment
in reprisal for her prior protected activity. Complainant made numerous allegations, including
that management made comments regarding Complainant’s prior EEO activity, disclosed
information relating to her EEO activity and disparaged her; management changed work rules to


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2022000239

require Complainant to process individually all BPA actions; management assigned Complainant
a heavy workload, required her to individually process the actions, resulting in her working
overtime; management refused to provide Complainant with formal and on-the-job training;
management refused to issue or approve a contracting warrant for Complainant; management
denied Complainant’s request for DISAM training; management told the Director of Finance to
watch out for Complainant because she had an EEO complaint; management denied
Complainant’s request to bulk fund BPAs; management disparaged Complainant and her
skills/abilities, belittled her in public, responded negatively to questions from Complainant,
ignored Complainant, rolled her eyes at her, did not invite her to outside meetings, would not
talk to her during meetings, treated her dismissively during a meeting, and praised
Complainant’s co-workers for work that Complainant performed; management told Complainant
that her daughter was being denied dependent status, ordered her daughter to leave the base, and
refused Complainant’s requests for a written decision/documentation on the decision;
management threatened to not allow Complainant to obtain a clearance, interfered with, and
denied her requests for Temporary Duty (TDY) to attend a security clearance re-investigation,
and refused multiple requests for approval of her TDY; management stated the Agency had
changed Complainant’s tour from two years to one year and renewed Complainant’s tour for
only one year; management questioned Complainant regarding her prior EEO activity;
management asked two Technical Sergeants to report on Complainant and monitor her work;
management did not approve a request to issue Complainant a Simplified Acquisition Threshold
(SAT) warrant and that management would never give Complainant consideration for
advancement; management failed to show up for a meeting with Complainant regarding her
harassment complaint; management made statements to Complainant’s co-workers that
Complainant had no skills and that they should not try to teach her anything; management
refused to take action on Complainant’s request for reimbursement of TDY fees; management
informed Complainant they made a mistake in sending her daughter home and referred to her as
a "special case"; Complainant was accused of having terrorist friends; management denied
Complainant’s request to take a Contracting training class and referenced her EEO settlement;
management discussed Complainant’s complaint regarding disparate enforcement of base rules
at an all-hands meeting; a Contact Representative approached Complainant, pointed in her face,
and said that Complainant "doesn't know [a named manager]" and needed to "watch out;"
management loudly confronted Complainant in front of another employee regarding her
complaints about unfair assignments, being prohibited from bulk processing BPAs, training
denials, and referred to Complainant’s lawsuit, and humiliated her; management refused to
correctly complete Complainant’s Individual Development Plan (IDP) and performance
appraisal; and management failed to respond to Complainant’s request for reassignment.

After an investigation, Complainant requested a hearing, but subsequently withdrew that request
and requested a final agency decision (FAD). Thereafter, the Agency issued a FAD concluding
the evidence did not establish discrimination or a hostile work environment. Complainant
appealed.
                                               3                                   2022000239

In EEOC Appeal No. 2020002870, the Commission found the evidence was sufficient to
conclude that unlawful retaliation occurred with respect to Complainant’s allegations regarding
management’s comments about Complainant’s prior EEO activity, disclosing information
regarding her EEO activity to other employees, and disparaging her; management telling the
Director of Finance to “watch out” for Complainant; management making inappropriate
comments regarding Complainant’s prior EEO activity; management questioning Complainant
about her prior EEO activity; management referencing Complainant’s EEO settlement when
denying Complainant’s request for training; management discussing Complainant’s disparate
enforcement of base rules; and management’s references to Complainant’s EEO complaint. In so
doing, the Commission noted that the overarching theme of Complainant’s complaint was an
allegation of reprisal for her prior EEO activity and Complainant raised several specific claims
that were focused on her EEO activity. The Commission found that these actions of management
could reasonably have a chilling effect on the willingness of employees to raise complaints
through the EEO process, noting that Complainant’s EEO activity was openly discussed with
individuals who did not have a need to know. The Commission determined, however, that the
record evidence did not support the remaining allegations of a retaliatory hostile work
environment. The Commission also addressed Complainant’s request for a default judgment
and/or sanctions and declined to issue either one. Thus, the Commission reversed the Agency’s
FAD in part and affirmed it in part. The matter was remanded to the Agency for remedial action.

In the instant request for reconsideration, we have carefully reviewed Complainant’s arguments
and determine that some of the matters either were raised or could have been raised below. We
note that during the original appeal from the Agency’s final order, Complainant presented
extensive arguments, some of which have been replicated in the instant request. We emphasize
that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A
(Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20,
2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020002870 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on this request. The Agency must now comply with the following Order.
                                               4                                   2022000239

                                           ORDER

To the extent it has not already done so, within ninety (90) calendar days from the date this
decision is issued, the Agency is ORDERED to take the following actions:

       1.     The Agency shall conduct a supplemental investigation on the issue of
              Complainant's entitlement to compensatory damages. Complainant will cooperate
              in the Agency's efforts to compute the amount of compensatory damages and will
              provide all relevant information requested by the Agency. A copy of the final
              decision must be submitted to the Compliance Officer as referenced below.

       2.     The Agency is directed to conduct EEO training for the supervisors identified as
              RMO1, RMO3, and MG in the Report of Investigation (ROI). 2 The training shall
              address their responsibilities with respect to eliminating discrimination in the
              Federal workplace with a special focus on the anti-retaliation provisions of the
              law.

       3.     The Agency shall consider taking appropriate disciplinary action against RMO1,
              RMO3, and MG. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it shall identify
              the action taken in its compliance report to EEOC. If the Agency decides not to
              take disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to
              impose discipline in its compliance report.

       4.     The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the paragraph entitled,
              “Posting Order.”

The Agency is directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the statement entitled
“Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall include supporting
documentation reflecting that the corrective action addressed above has been implemented.

                                 POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Military Training Mission, Eskan Military Base, in Riyadh,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed
by the Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and
electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued,
and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places
where notices to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to
ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.




2
 RMO1 is identified in the ROI on page 476. RMO3 is identified on page 530 of the ROI.
RMO2 is no longer employed with the Agency. The MG is identified on page 553 of the ROI.
                                                5                                     2022000239

The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the
paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of
the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format, and must be submitted
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                                6                                    2022000239

                 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 11, 2022
Date
