             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Karol K., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020004383

                                Hearing No. 510-2018-00308X

    Agency Nos. 200I-0317-2018101542; 200I-0317-2019101430; 200I-0317-2019104933

                                          DECISION

On July 29, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 30, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaints
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Assistant Veterans
Service Center Manager (AVSCM), GS-1102-13, at the Agency’s Regional Office in St.
Petersburg, Florida. As of May 2017, her first-level supervisor (S1) was the Veterans’ Service
Center Manager (VSCM). An Assistant Director was Complainant’s second-level supervisor
(S2).

In January 2017 to May 2017, Complainant was the AVSCM for the Public Contact Team,
during a time when the Public Contact Team was short-staffed.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2020004383

Because the team was short-staffed, Complainant felt it was implied that she had to assist the
front office since the work needed to be completed. She stated she spoke about the issue with
the Acting VSCM and human resources staff. Complainant requested more staff in January
2018, however, this request was denied. Complainant believed that management required more
evidence from her showing she needed more personnel when compared to others in the Agency.
Complainant stated eventually, more staff was received after modifications were made to the
hiring process for front staff, and after she was moved from the team.

S1 explained the Public Contact Team became short-staffed when veteran service representatives
were removed from the team since their position was not appropriate for the work done in Public
Contact. This was a decision made by their District office and supported by local leadership. S1
stated she had many conversations with Complainant since November 2017, about additional
staff and had asked Complainant for an analysis of her team showing the need for additional
staff. S1 stated she had not received the analysis from Complainant. S1 affirmed that the Public
Contact Team was now soliciting for two legal administrative specialists. S1 explained they
were aware of the impact of the loss of the veteran service representatives in Public Contact and
the need to revise standard operations in order to continue to provide timely service. S1 stated
information was needed to determine how many and where new staff was needed. In most
instances, the justification had to be submitted to the District office for approval.

On June 5, 2017, S1 assigned Complainant to another team, a move S1 discussed with
Complainant shortly after her promotion at the end of May 2017. Complainant alleged from
June 2017 to September 2017, she was assigned a project for performance and special
contribution awards that she felt was extreme because it took her away from her assigned duties.
During a year-end evaluation meeting on December 21, 2017, Complainant said S1 told S2 that
she could not explain how an issue occurred with the awards, which Complainant felt was
condescending. Complainant believed S1 spoke harshly to her and elongated her face when
talking to her, and that her actions during meetings made her feel angry, humiliated and anxious.

S1 explained the Public Contact team was assigned to another AVSCM because Complainant
was not timely meeting stakeholder expectations, both internally and externally. She said there
were continued concerns from Congressional Staffers, the Director’s Office and herself, and the
situation was not improving. In addition, assignments given to Complainant to improve service
and the situation, such as the Inquiry Standard Operating Procedures, the revision of the Legal
Administrative Specialist Performance Standards and the Congressional Inquiry Timeliness
Action Plan were not completed. With respect to Complainant being assigned a project for
performance and special contribution awards, S1 explained Complainant was the point of contact
and she was not expected to do all of the work and that she never expected any AVSCM’s to use
personal time on an assignment.


Complainant believed S1 changed her fiscal year (FY) 2017 performance rating to ‘Excellent’
from ‘Outstanding’ because S2 did not want to sign the evaluation given the situation with the
performance awards. S1 denied changing Complainant’s FY2017 evaluation.
                                               3                                    2020004383

For Complainant’s FY2017 evaluation, S1 had met with the Acting VCSM (S2), who had been
Complainant’s supervisor prior to S1 starting her position in May 2017. S2 concurred
Complainant’s performance was reflective of an Excellent rating.

On April 1, 2018, S1 reassigned Complainant and five other AVSCMs to different teams because
AVSCMSs typically rotated annually and were assigned different teams and responsibilities for
the career development of the AVSCMs and to maximize the skills of the AVSCMs to the
benefit of the VSC. Complainant stated she was moved because she was not given enough
employees to assure that all the work could be completed.

In September 2018, Complainant sent two employees memorandums notifying them of proposed
disciplinary actions due to allegations of fraud. However, in response to these memorandums,
Complainant was subject to a fact-finding investigation by an Assistant Director (AD1) (who did
not typically have supervisory responsibility for Complainant’s Division) to determine whether
Complainant failed to follow instructions regarding employee performance and conduct
monitoring. AD1 concluded Complainant issued the proposals with inaccuracies, despite having
had the information for them to be accurate. Based on these findings, Complainant was issued a
seven-day suspension on January 29, 2019, from February 4 through February 10, 2019.
Complainant believed S1 should have discussed the incident with her instead of initiating an
investigation but that S1 had stopped communicating with her.

S1 explained that when she learned of the proposed suspensions Complainant had issued, she
emailed Complainant on October 5, 2019, for an explanation of the situation and met with
Complainant on October 9, 2019. S1 stated Complainant raised her voice and refused to answer
S1’s questions, resulting in S1 repeatedly asking her to leave her office so that Complainant
could regain her composure. AD1 found Complainant failed to incorporate information requested
by S1 in the proposed suspensions and failed to utilize the template created by the work group
for one of the proposed suspensions issued, which resulted in inconsistent evidence files for the
proposed suspensions. AD1 determined Complainant had had sufficient information to issue the
proposed suspensions without inaccuracies. S1 explained AD1’s conclusion was based on
Complainant’s past experience with proposed adverse and disciplinary actions, her time as an
assistant division chief, and verbal and written guidance.

On December 7, 2018, Complainant received an overall rating of Fully Successful for the
FY21018 time period. In support of the rating, S1 cited Complainant’s issues with timeliness
and managing emails. Complainant believed she should have been rated as Excellent at a
minimum as she did what she could with the resources that she had. Complainant acknowledged
S1 had given her feedback during FY2018 regarding areas of performance that needed
improvement, including placing her on an individual development plan. The six other AVSCMs
who S1 supervised all received a rating of Outstanding on their FY2018 performance appraisals.
Two of those AVSCMs, oversaw the Public Contact team before and after her, and Complainant
believed had received more support from S1.
                                               4                                   2020004383

S1 stated she issued Complainant an overall rating of Fully Successful and that she followed the
Agency’s regulations, rules and polices in rating Complainant. Complainant was rated Fully
Successful on the critical elements of division performance management, supervisor monitoring
and response management. S1 specifically referenced Complainant failing to meet clear
expectations of detail or timeliness; needing S1 to follow-up with her to help Complainant
complete performance and conduct actions; and Complainant’s failure to complete reports on
time and not requesting extensions in a timely manner. S1 said she communicated to
Complainant the areas that needed improvement in monthly reviews and informal
communications during FY2018. S1 explained CP was rated as Exceptional on all other
elements, including the critical elements of teamwork and organizational support and program
integrity and the noncritical elements of workplace morale management and external relations
(building coalitions).

On June 10, 2019, Complainant was issued a notice of proposed demotion from AVSCM, GS-14
to Veterans Service Representative (VSR), GS-12. The notice stated that from October 1, 2018,
through May 22, 2019, Complainant failed to meet the performance standard of the critical
element Supervisor Mentoring of the AVSCM position. Additionally, Complainant failed to keep
S1 informed of the developing issues within Complainant’s area of responsibility. The notice
stated there had been four substantiated complaints during the rating period and that
Complainant failed to effectively or timely address the management of four employees. The
letter specifies the effects Complainant actions had on the employees and the Agency such as in
two of the situations, the employees were disadvantaged because their Within Grade increases
were delayed. The notice went on to explain that for Complainant to meet the requirements for a
Fully Successful rating in the critical element Supervisor Mentoring, she could not have more
than two substantiated complaints and as of that date, Complainant had four.

Complainant filed three EEO complaints alleging the Agency subjected her to discrimination and
a hostile work environment on the bases of race (African-American), color (brown), sex (female)
and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1. Complainant’s team was understaffed from January 2017 – May 2017 and she was
          expected to assist front office staff with their work, as well as complete her own
          assignments;

       2. In January 2018, the Complainant’s request for additional staff was denied;

       3. In June 2017, Complainant was assigned to another team;

       4. From June 2017 – September 2017, Complainant was assigned a project for
          performance and special contribution awards;

       5. Since July 2017, Complainant’s immediate supervisor made condescending
          comments about her performance on a weekly basis;
                                               5                                   2020004383

       6. On December 22, 2017, Complainant’s performance rating for FY17 was Excellent;

       7. Since January 17, 2018, Complainant’s immediate supervisor spoke to Complainant
          in a condescending manner and made inappropriate facial gestures towards her during
          meetings;

       8. On April 1, 2018, Complainant was moved to another team;

       9. On November 5, 2018, Complainant was the subject of a fact-finding investigation;

       10. On December 12, 2018, Complainant was rated Fully Successful for FY18;

       11. On December 26, 2018, Complainant was issued a seven-day suspension that was
           sustained on January 29, 2019; and

       12. On June 10, 2019, she received a notice of proposed demotion from AVSCM, GS-14
           to Veterans Service Representative (VSR), GS-12.

At the conclusion of the investigations, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
reports of investigation and notice of her right to request hearings before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant initially requested hearings
for Agency Nos. 200I-0317-2018101542 and 200I-0317-2019101430. The AJ assigned to the
matters consolidated the complaints, but Complainant subsequently withdrew her hearing
request. In addition, Complainant requested a final agency decision (FAD) for Agency No.
200I-0317-2019104933 (claim (12)). In accordance with Complainant’s requests, the Agency
consolidated all three complaints and issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the
FAD, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Hostile Work Environment
                                                6                                    2020004383

To establish a claim of harassment, a complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).
Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

The antidiscrimination statutes are not civility codes. Rather, they forbid “only behavior so
objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim's employment.” Oncale v.
Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998). Therefore, to prove her harassment
claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or
so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's position would have found the conduct
to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was taken because of her
protected classes. Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements, hostility and motive,
will the question of Agency liability present itself.

In this case, we find that the totality of the alleged conduct was not sufficiently severe or
pervasive to establish a legally hostile work environment. Even assuming that the alleged
conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to create a hostile work environment, the
Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the Agency's actions were based on
discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Rather, the evidentiary record reflects that the alleged
incidents were more likely the result of routine supervision, managerial discipline, and general
workplace disputes and tribulations as discussed more fully above.

There is no evidence aside from conclusory statements that Complainant’s protected classes were
the reason behind the Agency’s actions. Moreover, to the extent Complainant claims that she
was subjected to disparate treatment, the Commission finds that Complainant has not proffered
any evidence demonstrating that the Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for
discrimination or reprisal. Accordingly, we find that Complainant has not shown that she was
subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile work environment.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, it is the decision of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission to AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision because a preponderance of the record
evidence does not establish that discrimination occurred.
                                                7                                    2020004383

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision.
                                                8                                    2020004383

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the
official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 19, 2022
Date
