             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Beverlee C., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Christine Wormuth,
                                           Secretary,
                                    Department of the Army,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021000512

                                 Hearing No. 480-2018-00719X

                              Agency No. ARZAMA17SEP03413

                                           DECISION

On October 23, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
September 24, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Supervisory Budget
Analyst, GS-0560-12, at the Agency’s U.S. Army Garrison (USAG) Japan Resource
Management Office (RMO) in Okinawa, Japan.

On November 15, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (African American) and reprisal for prior protected
EEO activity when:

    1. On September 19, 2017, Complainant’s second line supervisor, Resources Management
       Officer (“Supervisor”), informed Complainant, her Overseas Tour Extension (“OTEX”)


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2021000512

       was pulled from the Regional Office where it was being submitted for approval.
       Supervisor sent an email explaining Complainant’s OTEX was pulled at the request of
       USAG Japan leadership to ensure the RMO meets the IMCOM CG mandated Fiscal Year
       2019 (“FY19”) Table of Distribution and Allowances (“TDA”) on board strength her
       position was still a valid position on the FY19 TDA; and

   2. On October 26, 2017, Complainant was approached by a USARJ (acronym not defined)
      Budget Office employee asking about her EEO complaint and telling her Supervisor was
      outside telling everyone about her complaint. Supervisor was said to have made the
      comment: “[Complainant] has a Black person’s attitude.”

The Agency accepted the foregoing claims and then conducted an investigation into the matter.
However, after the initial investigation was completed, the Agency’s Equal Employment
Opportunity Compliance and Complaints Review Director determined that insufficient evidence
existed to render a legally sufficient decision. The Director ordered a supplemental investigation.

The investigation and supplemental investigation showed that Complainant worked as a
Supervisory Budget Analyst in the USAG Japan Resource Management Office. Complainant is
African American. Supervisor is biracial (Filipino and Caucasian). Complainant testified that
after she had been in this position for a year, Supervisor asked her if she would like to put in an
extension of time (OTEX) to remain in that command. Complainant agreed. The appropriate
paperwork for Complainant’ OTEX was completed and signed by Supervisor, the current
Resource Management Officer, and the Garrison commander. It was then forwarded to the
Region in Honolulu, Hawaii for approval. Approval of an OTEX request by Region is not
guaranteed.

While Complainant’s OTEX request was pending approval at Region, she felt there were
communication problems between her and Supervisor. Supervisor contends that around the week
of August 14, 2017, he had a conversation with an EEO specialist to seek advice on how to
resolve an issue that occurred between Complainant and local national employees while he was
on leave at the beginning of August 2017. The EEO specialist advised Supervisor that
Complainant felt he was favoring local national employees. Supervisor contends he was not
favoring either side, but he was trying to resolve differences between Complainant and the local
national employees. He states the local national employees made a request to which Complainant
was not immediately agreeable. The record does show that one local national employee sent a
memo to Supervisor with negative comments about working with Complainant during
Supervisor’s absence.

On August 21, 2017, Complainant visited the EEO office to request assistance and/or mediation
for the issues between her and Supervisor. She testified that she was having communication
issues with Supervisor that were causing a hostile work environment for her. She stated he
expressed her concerns to Supervisor and he ignored her. On August 23, 2017, Supervisor was
contacted by the EEO specialist about mediation between him and Complainant. Complainant
states that Supervisor declined the mediation and preferred to handle it “his way.”
                                              3                                   2021000512

Supervisor states he continued his discussions with Complainant, discussing her favoritism
concerns in detail, and at the conclusion of the meeting, he and Complainant both agreed
mediation was no longer necessary. He contends Complainant later met with local national
employees directly and they worked to resolve their differences.

On August 24, 2017, Supervisor emailed the Deputy to the Garrison Commander (“Deputy”)
requesting that Complainant’s OTEX be pulled back from consideration by Region. In the email,
Supervisor stated that the RMO was over-strength due to one overhire, a Financial Systems
Analyst in the Budget Division. He stated that if Complainant’s OTEX was pulled, she would
vacate her authorized Budget Analyst position in June 2018 and he was requesting that her
vacated position then be used to cover the overhired Financial Analyst position, which would
ensure they were within strength by the mandated date of September 30, 2018. Deputy complied
and emailed Region requesting that Complainant’s OTEX be removed from the current pending
requests at Region and be returned to USAG Japan without action based on management’s
request. Region then requested that USAG Japan review the 15 other OTEX submissions that
were pending at Region to ensure they would not cause an issue. As a result, Supervisor then
requested on September 12, 2017 that one additional employee’s OTEX be returned without
action. This employee is also African American. Of the then-remaining 14 OTEX requests, 7
employees are African American, 6 employees are Caucasian, and 1 employee is Asian.

Deputy testified that when the OTEX requests were submitted to the Region, the Region G-8
asked them to review all submissions to ensure compliance with Fiscal Year 2019 (“FY19”)
Table of Distribution and Allowances (“TDA”). He stated that two OTEX requests (including
Complainant’s) were withdrawn because the projections of personnel assigned by grade and
series did not support the OTEX requests and USAG Japan was required to comply with the
published IMCOM OPORD to be down to their FY19 TDA authorizations no later than
September 30, 2018.

Complainant states that on September 19, 2017, Supervisor informed her that her OTEX request
had been pulled from consideration by Region. Supervisor states that when she asked him,
Supervisor told her Command had initiated the pull back and he would not admit that it was him.
She states her position was a permanent position and would not have put the command over
strength. She states Supervisor pulled her OTEX request from consideration by Region less than
a month after she contacted the EEO office. Complainant asserted this is a reason employees are
afraid to go to EEO with a complaint because of the fear of reprisal, which is what happened to
her when her OTEX request was pulled. She states Supervisor did not have any reason to pull her
OTEX request other than her EEO activity because he had signed approval of her OTEX request
originally. Supervisor stated the sole reason for pulling back Complainant’s OTEX request was
the requirement to meet the mandated FY19 TDA strength by September 30, 2018. He denied
that Complainant’s performance, race, or EEO activity were factors in this decision.
                                               4                                    2021000512

Complainant also claimed discrimination when on October 26, 2017, she was approached by a
USARJ Budget Office employee (who did not want to be identified for fear of reprisal) who
advised her that Supervisor was telling others about her complaint and that Supervisor said
“[Complainant] has a Black person’s attitude.” She says that when she confronted Supervisor
about this statement, he said that he could not remember exactly what he said about
Complainant, but he was sorry that he said it. She notes he did not deny making the statement.
Complainant asserts there is also a local national employee who heard this statement, but she was
afraid to come forward because her supervisor is good friends with Supervisor. Complainant
states she brought this statement to the attention of the Garrison Commander, but Supervisor
repeated his reply.

Supervisor stated he informed three specific RMO Division Chiefs of a possible EEO complaint
from Complainant on a need to know basis, as well as Deputy. He testified that he does “not
recall every saying ‘[Complainant] has a Black person’s attitude’ at any time in any of [his]
discussions.” He said that during EEO mediation in November 2017, he apologized for the
statement even though he was unable to confirm or deny that it was said. During this mediation,
Supervisor also agreed to re-submit Complainant’s OTEX request, however, it was later denied
by the Garrison Commander because of RMO’s current strengths and the requirement to right
size the organization to get in line with the FY19 TDA by September 30, 2019.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. The AJ assigned to the case
issued an order on July 11, 2019 partially denying the Agency’s motion for summary judgment
and an order to begin scheduling. On October 1, 2019, Complainant withdrew her request for a
hearing and requested a FAD instead. The AJ granted her request and dismissed the case with
prejudice on October 4, 2019. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant filed the instant appeal.

On appeal, Complainant contends the FAD was based on an erroneous application of the law to
the facts regarding her racial discrimination claim. She states she has sufficiently demonstrated
the Agency discriminated against her on the basis of her race because she has shown an inference
of discrimination based on Supervisor’s statement about her attitude. She notes the other
employee whose OTEX request was pulled is also African American, which supports that the
Agency’s decision was based on race. Complainant further contends the FAD was based on
erroneous application of the law to the facts regarding her retaliation claim. She states the
timeline of events at issue in her complaint show a clear temporal nexus between her EEO
activity and the adverse events. Lastly, Complainant contends the FAD erroneously found that
the Agency’s proffered reasons for its actions were not pretext. She states the Agency relied on
self-serving testimony of Agency officials, which contained contradictions. She also notes that
Supervisor has not denied he made the comment about her attitude.
                                                5                                     2021000512

The Agency contends on appeal that it articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
pulling back Complainant’s OTEX request and that Supervisor’s testimony regarding the reasons
is support by the testimony of Deputy and the Human Resources Program Manager. The Agency
contends there is no evidence that Supervisor’s actions were prompted by an unlawful
discriminatory motive based on Complainant’s race or reprisal. As to Supervisor’s statement
about Complainant’s attitude, the Agency contends there is no evidence in the record that
Supervisor ever made the statement or disclosed Complainant’s EEO activity to a person who
did not have a need to know. The Agency further contends that even if, for the sake of argument,
Supervisor made the comment, it was not severe or pervasive enough to create a hostile, abusive,
or offensive work environment for Complainant.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs
v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S.
502 (1993). Complainant must show that the agency's action was more likely than not motivated
by discrimination, that is, that the action was influenced by legally impermissible criteria.
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253; Baker v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Petition No. (May 13, 1999). Absent
a showing that the agency's articulated reason was proffered to mask discrimination, complainant
cannot prevail. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256; Crosland v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Petition No.
03990018 (July 1, 1999); Mongere v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 01970738 (March
18, 1999).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
                                                 6                                     2021000512

Where the Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Claim 1

Here, assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of race discrimination
and/or retaliation, her claim still fails, as we find the Agency articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its conduct. USAG Japan was mandated to meet certain FY19
TDA strength targets. Although Complainant’s position was not a TDA issue, the Agency had
overhired a financial systems analyst position. In order to keep the financial systems analyst
position, they would need to reduce another position. The decision was made to pull back
Complainant’s OTEX request and then use her vacated position to keep the financial systems
analyst position. This would allow USAG Japan to meet the FY19 TDA requirements by the
September 30, 2018 deadline. The need to meet FY19 TDA targets was supported by emails, as
well as testimony of Supervisor and Deputy.

As evidence of pretext, Complainant offers that the decision to pull back her OTEX request was
made just after her EEO activity, therefore showing a temporal nexus, and she offers that
Supervisor made a racist remark about her attitude. However, there is no evidence in the record
to corroborate Complainant’s claim that this statement was even made. She has not identified the
witness to whom the statement was allegedly made and has not provided any testimony from this
witness. Complainant claims this is because the witness fears reprisal. Regardless, this is not
sufficient to show that the decision to pull back Complainant’s OTEX request was more likely
than not motivated by discrimination. Additionally, Supervisor denied that Complainant’s race or
EEO activity were factors in the decision. Complainant does not deny that there were overhires
or a need to meet the FY19 TDA targets; instead she notes that her position was not the
overhired position. The question is not whether the agency made the best, or even a sound,
business decision; it is whether the real reason is discrimination. See, e.g., Chavez v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120055246 (Jan. 5, 2007); see also Carson v. Bethlehem Steel
Corporation, 82 F.3d 157, 159 (7th Cir. 1982) (noting that “the question is not whether the
employer made the best, or even a sound, business decision; it is whether the real reason [was
discriminatory]”). Without proof of a demonstrably discriminatory motive, the wisdom of the
Agency's business decisions may not be second-guessed. Mendez v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120090593 (May 20, 2010).
                                               7                                    2021000512

Claim 2

Complainant, who has the ultimate burden of proof, has not established these incidents occurred
as alleged. As noted above, the evidence in the record is not sufficient to show that the alleged
racist remark was actually said by Supervisor or that he told anyone without a need to know
about Complainant’s EEO activity. Therefore, she cannot state a prima facie case of
discrimination or hostile work environment based on these allegations.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s finding of no discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                8                                     2021000512

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 18, 2022
Date
