             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Darrell K., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                   Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                           (Transportation Security Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021004841

                                Hearing No. 551-2020-00118X

                               Agency No. HS-TSA-00866-2020

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s final decision, dated July
16, 2021, concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Federal Air Marshal
(Marshal), 1801, I Band, at the Agency’s Seattle Field Office in Renton, Washington. Senior
Federal Marshal (Senior Marshal) was Complainant's Acting Supervisor from April 2019 to
April 2020. Supervisory Federal Air Marshal (Supervisory Marshal 1) was his second-level
supervisor.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2021004841

On April 22, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint (Agency Case No. HS-TSA-00866-
2020) alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work
environment on the bases of race (Asian) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
(Agency Case Nos. HS-TSA-00210-2019, HS-TSA-01037-2018) when:

       1.      On or about January 22, 2020, management failed to provide Complainant
               with an In-Band Increase (IBI) and/or a Performance In-Band Increase
               (PBI) award.

       2.      On or about January 22, 2020, management issued Complainant an
               “Achieved Expectations” fiscal year 2019 (FY19) performance rating.

       3.      On January 22, 2020, a management official told Complainant that he
               must retire from the Agency’s Federal Air Marshal Service (FAMS) as
               soon as he is eligible. 2

On November 30, 2020, Complainant filed a second complaint (Agency Case No. HS-TSA-
02340-2020) alleging that he was discriminated against and subjected to a hostile work
environment based on race (Asian) and in reprisal for prior EEO activity (Agency Case No. HS-
TSA-00866-2020) when:
       4.      On July 31, 2020, management forced Complainant to retire from the
               FAMS.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.
On October 2, 2019, Complainant received his FY19 performance evaluation, scoring a 3.44,
earning an overall “Achieved Expectations.” Complainant maintained that he was previously
rated at 3.5 or higher until filing an EEO complaint in 2018. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 55.
All supervisors who gave affidavits were aware of Complainant’s prior EEO complaints. Id. at
66, 73, 80, 86, 93.

Supervisory Federal Air Marshal (Supervisory Marshal 2), who was asked by management to sit
in and sign the evaluation for Senior Marshal, was the rating official, and Supervisory Air
Marshal in Charge (Marshal in Charge) was the reviewing official. Id. at 73, 245-47.
Complainant received a rating of “Exceeded Expectations” for two performance goals and three
competencies, and a rating of “Achieved Expectations” for the remaining three performance
goals and three competencies. Id.

2
  As Complainant has clarified in his affidavit that claim 3 did not occur, we find that
Complainant has withdrawn claim 3. Namely, Complainant stated in his original June 3, 2020
affidavit that no one at the Seattle Field Office told him he must retire. ROI at 58. Specifically,
Complainant said, “I was never told to retire from [the Agency] by anyone at the Seattle Field
Office. The [Agency’s] EEO Counselor . . . inserted this claim in my complaint without my
knowledge or consent. I never made this claim to [the Agency] either in writing or orally.” Id.
                                                3                                     2021004841

In the “Year-End Comments,” Supervisory Marshal 2 described Complainant as a “seasoned law
enforcement officer” and respected team member who completed his mandatory training
requirement, was flexible in responding to changes, and paid attention to details. Additionally,
Supervisory Marshal 2 remarked that while Complainant’s communications had been sufficient,
he noted that Complainant should first speak with him or the duty supervisor when Complainant
is assigned a “non-mission status day or a field office training day.” He recommended that
Complainant “take a more positive approach when in training.”

Senior Marshal reported that when Complainant got the evaluation, he had a conversation with
Complainant about his score. Id. at 67-68. Senior Marshal said he told Complainant that
Complainant’s derogatory comment to his colleagues about a supervisor, while Complainant was
in the locker room, could lower morale. Id. at 68. Senior Marshal also told Complainant not
making such comments and applying for the position of Senior Federal Air Marshal could
potentially raise his score. Id. For his part, Complainant contended Senior Marshal told
Complainant to stop talking to other employees about his EEO complaint. Id. at 56.

Complainant stated that evaluations and awards were decided by an arbitrary and discriminatory
process that was used to discriminate against him. Id. at 57. Complainant realized he was not
granted an IBI or PBI increase when he received an email in January 2020 that normally would
have conveyed this information but omitted it. Id. at 56. Marshal in Charge, the final decision-
maker on IBI or PBI increases, stated that based on Complainant’s performance evaluation score,
he was not entitled to an IBI or PBI but only a cash award. Id. at 82; see also Exhibit (Exh.) 3 to
Agency Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ), at 16. The record reflects that no one with a
performance rating of less than 3.99 received an IBI or PBI at the Seattle Field Office. Exh. 3 to
Agency MSJ.

Complainant proffered Federal Air Marshal (Marshal 2) (African American, no prior EEO
activity) as a comparator who was rated higher on his performance evaluation and allegedly
received an IBI increase, despite Marshal 2’s misconduct. Id. at 55, 57. The record reflects that
Marshal 2 qualified for the IBI, based on his higher performance evaluation score.
Complainant’s Response to Motion for Protective Order, Exh. A. According to Marshal in
Charge, Marshal 2 received a higher performance evaluation rating than Complainant because
Marshal 2 completed numerous collateral assignments and took on additional responsibilities for
the betterment of the office. ROI at 83. While Complainant cited Marshal 2 as a comparator, the
record reflects that Marshal 2 was not given an IBI increase, due to his disciplinary issues.
Agency Reply in Support of Motion to Quash Deposition and/or for Protective Order,
Declaration by Administrative Officer, at 6-7.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing for HS-TSA-00866-2020
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant
timely requested a hearing but subsequently withdrew his request. Consequently, the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
                                               4                                   2021004841

The decision concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. Specifically, it found that Complainant did not prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that its legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s
performance rating and lack of IBI or PBI award were pretextual. It also found that Complainant
failed to prove that the Agency constructively discharged him. 3 According to the Agency,
Complainant provided no evidence that its actions were based on race or retaliation for prior
EEO activity.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant argues that he was subject to discrimination and harassment. He cites his poor
performance evaluations as proof of this. He also contends that he was subject to retaliation in
claim 2. He submits he is entitled to compensatory damages for the harm he suffered. In a
supporting statement, Complainant maintains that Marshal in Charge launched a retaliation
campaign against him to discredit his EEO claims. Complainant also outlines alleged
performance and disciplinary issues regarding Marshal 2, the purported comparator. In addition,
Complainant points out that, after an internal investigation, a Letter of Counseling (LOC) was
issued in April 2021 to Marshal in Charge. 4
The Agency, in pertinent part, reiterates the arguments in its final agency decision (FAD). In
addition, regarding Complainant’s FY19 evaluation, it argues that Complainant does not identify
with specificity why he should have been scored higher. It further submits that Complainant
fails to establish a hostile work environment based on his race or EEO protected activity. The
Agency asks the Commission not to consider Complainant’s unsigned unsworn statement, and
exhibits, because they are not part of the record nor relevant to the instant complaint. 5
                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29

3
  The Agency provided Complainant Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) rights for this
claim, raised in Complaint HS-TSA-02340-2020. Consequently, we shall not address the
constructive discharge claim herein. See EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.302; Chris A. v.
Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 2019004938 (Feb. 12, 2020). As of the time of this
decision, Complainant had not filed an appeal with the MSPB.
4
  The LOC stated that the excessive number of courses (52) assigned to Complainant, in the
context of the contentious meeting that precipitated their assignment, gave the appearance that
Marshal in Charge unfairly assigned the courses as a punitive method. ROI Supplemental at 20-
23.
5
  We have considered Complainant’s appellate arguments only to the extent that they were
relevant to this appeal.
                                                5                                     2021004841

C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n.13; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502
(1993).

Reprisal claims are considered with a broad view of coverage. See Burlington N. and Santa Fe
Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 67-68 (2006); see also, Carroll v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC
Request No. 05970939 (Apr. 4, 2000). Retaliatory actions that can be challenged are not
restricted to those that affect a term or condition of employment. Id. Rather, a complainant is
also protected from any discrimination that is reasonably likely to deter protected activity. Id.;
see also, Carroll, supra.
This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

We find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
Namely, regarding claim 2, the Agency based Complainant’s performance rating on his overall
work performance. Supervisory Marshal 2 noted that Complainant could communicate better
and take a more positive approach in training. Examples of poor communication included
Complainant making a derogatory comment to his colleagues about a supervisor.
                                               6                                   2021004841

In addition, Complainant failed to inform management when he was assigned a non-mission
status or field office training day. Senior Marshal explained that refraining from making
derogatory comments during a training day and applying to the position of Senior Federal Air
Marshal could potentially raise Complainant’s score. As for claim 1, Marshal in Charge, along
with the Administrative Officer, determined that Complainant did not receive a high enough
score on his performance evaluation to receive an IBI and/or PBI increase. Complainant’s
performance rating was 3.44 and no one with a performance rating of less than 3.99 received an
IBI or PBI.

As the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, Complainant
now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency’s stated reasons were merely a pretext for
discrimination. In arguing pretext, Complainant proffered Marshal 2, who Complainant claims
was rated higher on his performance evaluation; received a higher cash bonus; and was given an
IBI in 2019, despite Marshal 2’s misconduct issues.

Regarding claim 2, we are unpersuaded by Complainant’s evidence of pretext based on his
proffered comparator. Complainant and Marshal 2 were in a different supervisory chain of
command and, thus, are not similarly situated. To demonstrate that another employee is a
similarly situated comparator, Complainant must show that all relevant aspects of the
comparator’s work situation were nearly identical to his own. Martinez v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113436 (Nov. 1, 2011) (finding comparators were not similarly
situated when they had different supervisors and/or a different chain of command than
complainant). In addition, Marshal in Charge attested that Marshal 2 received a higher
performance evaluation rating than Complainant because Marshal 2 completed numerous
collateral assignments and took on additional responsibilities.

With regard to claim 1, we find that Marshal 2 was not treated differently than Complainant.
The Administrative Officer attested that Marshal 2 did not receive an IBI increase in FY19, due
to his disciplinary issues.

Complainant has not otherwise established pretext by the preponderance of the evidence in the
record. Complainant, thus, did not establish that the Agency was motivated by discriminatory
animus.

Hostile Work Environment

Finally, to the extent that Complainant is alleging that he was subjected to a hostile work
environment, the Commission finds that under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift
Systems. Inc., 510 U.S. 17 (1993), Complainant's claim of hostile work environment must fail.
See Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Mar.
3, 1994). Complainant's harassment claim is precluded based on the Commission's finding that
he failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by
discriminatory animus with regard to claims 1 and 2. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 01932923 (Sept. 21, 2000).
                                                  7                                 2021004841


                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Final Agency Decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                8                                     2021004841

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 9, 2022
Date
