             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Brant C., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Kilolo Kijakazi,
                                     Acting Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                             Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020005291

                                   Agency No. ATL-19-1178

                                           DECISION

On September 18, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 20, 2020, final concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, we
AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Social Insurance
Specialist (Claims Specialist), GS-0105-11, at the Ocala Field Office in Ocala, Florida.

On December 11, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of disability (mental) and reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity under Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. The Agency subsequently accepted
the complaint for investigation and framed Complainant’s allegations in the following manner:

       1. Whether the Agency subjected Complainant to harassment (non-sexual) based on
          disability and reprisal between August 30, 2019 and May 12, 2020, in terms of time
          and attendance, medical documentation, and reasonable accommodation;


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2020005291


       2. Whether the Agency subjected Complainant to disparate treatment based on disability
          and reprisal when, on August 30, 2019, his approved request for advanced sick leave
          was changed to leave without pay (LWOP); and

       3. Whether the Agency failed to provide Complainant with a reasonable accommodation
          based on disability between August 30 and November 20, 2019, when Complainant’s
          reasonable accommodation was removed.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). According to the Agency, Complainant did
not request a hearing within the timeframe provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f). Consequently,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

This appeal followed. Complainant did not submit any contentions in support of his appeal. The
Agency requests that the Commission affirm its final decision.

Having reviewed the record, we find that the Agency correctly analyzed the facts and law of this
case to determine that Complainant did not establish that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination or harassment as alleged. In reaching this conclusion, we note that Complainant
has not offered any arguments as to why the Agency erred in finding no discrimination.
Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                  3                                   2020005291

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  4                                     2020005291

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 15, 2022
Date
