             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                       Warner A., 1
                                       Complainant,

                                             v.

                                  Denis R. McDonough,
                                        Secretary,
                              Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                         Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2022000092

                            Agency No. 20DR-0010-2019100341

                                        DECISION

On October 7, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 6, 2021, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                     BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Health System
Specialist/Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Manager, GS-0671-13, at the Agency’s VA
Medical Center in Boise, Idaho.

In July 2018, the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Workforce Management and
Consultant’s Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Employment (EEO/AE) Office in
Washington, D.C. advertised for two GS-14 EEO Manager positions under Vacancy
Announcements No. CASA-10257783-CLN-18 (hereinafter Vacancy No. 7783) and CASA-
10257917-CLN-18 (hereinafter Vacancy No. 7917).



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2022000092

The Director in the Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Employment Office of the
Veterans Health Administration (EEO Director), was the Selecting Official (SO) for Vacancy
Announcement No. 7783. Complainant applied for both positions. Complainant was not
selected for Vacancy No. 7783, and Vacancy No. 7917 was canceled.

On November 26, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (Caucasian), sex (male), color (white), and age
(55), when, on September 17, 2018, and October 18, 2018, he was not selected for two GS-14
EEO Manager positions under Vacancy Announcements No. CASA-10257783-CLN-18 and
CASA-10257917-CLN-18.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
Complainant appealed the Agency’s final decision. In EEOC Appeal No. 2020000027 (April 22,
2021), the Commission affirmed the Agency’s finding of no discrimination for Vacancy No.
7917. However, regarding Vacancy No. 7783, the Commission determined the record lacked
necessary information, vacated the Agency’s finding of no discrimination, and remanded the
matter to the Agency for a detailed supplemental investigation. Complainant filed a request for
reconsideration of the Commission’s decision. In EEOC Request No. 2021002985 (July 27,
2021), the Commission denied the request and reiterated the Order for the Agency to conduct a
supplemental investigation regarding Vacancy No. 7783.

On June 11, 2021, after completion of its supplemental investigation, the Agency’s Office of
Resolution Management, Diversity and Inclusion (ORMDI) transmitted the complaint file to the
Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication (OEDCA) for a final Agency
decision. Upon review, OEDCA determined that the supplemental investigation did not fully
comply with the Commission’s April 22, 2021, remand Order. On June 21, 2021, OEDCA
remanded the complaint file to ORMDI for a second supplemental investigation, to ensure
compliance with the Commission’s remand Order. On August 10, 2021, after completion of its
second supplemental investigation, ORMDI transmitted the complaint file to OEDCA for a final
Agency decision. On October 6, 2021, OEDCA issued a final decision finding no
discrimination. On October 7, 2021 Complainant filed the present appeal. Complainant filed
multiple submissions in support of his appeal. However, the only timely submissions were a
brief in support of his appeal filed on October 7, 2021, and a request for an expedited decision
filed on November 6, 2021. The Commission's regulations provide that “[a]ny statement or brief
on behalf of a complainant in support of the appeal must be submitted to the Office of Federal
Operations within 30 days of filing the notice of appeal.” 29 C.F.R. §1614.403(d). As such, we
will only consider the arguments in Complainant’s two timely submissions.
                                               3                                   2022000092

On appeal, Complainant claims that SO has not done enough to address the barriers White males
face in employment. Complainant claims SO was involved in the initial review of resumes for
Vacancy No. 7783. He argues that SO submitted scores on applicants’ resumes to the Human
Resources Specialist (HRS) because he claims SO was the only person designated to enter and
submit scores to HRS. Complainant also cites the different scores in the record for his initial
application rating as proof that SO was involved in the initial scoring of resumes. He argues SO
admitted he did not read Complainant’s resume. Complainant argues he would have been
selected as an “equally qualified candidate” but for racial discrimination. Complainant claims
SO in this case is the Director of EEO and Affirmative Employment and that the Agency should
have referred this case to an entity outside of the department due to a conflict of interest.
Further, Complainant argues the scoring of his application should have been higher because he
should have been given additional points for, in part, his Outstanding Performance ratings over
the past eight years and his 10 years of GS-13 EEO Manager experience. Moreover, he notes
that he had more education in the form of a Bachelor of Science (BS) in Accounting and
Business and a Master of Public Administration (MPA) than the Selectee who had a Bachelor of
Fine Arts Degree in Graphic Design.

The Agency filed a brief in opposition to Complainant’s appeal. The Agency states Complainant
was eliminated from the interview list for Vacancy No. 7783 by EEO Managers 1 and 2. The
Agency claims Complainant lacked the type of qualifications that were needed for a higher score
for the position at issue such as experience serving on National Level EEO Committees, VISN
Level EEO Committees, and EEO best practices or initiatives shared and implemented at the
VISN or National Level. The Agency notes that Complainant failed to show that his
qualifications were superior to the Selectee’s qualifications. The Agency acknowledges that
Complainant had an impressive education; however, his academic achievements were not listed
as qualifications, competencies, or preferences for the position in question. The Agency claims
Complainant has nothing more than his opinion as to how his credentials surpass those of the
Selectee, which does not constitute persuasive evidence of pretext.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                4                                     2022000092

Agency’s Investigation and Processing of the Complaint

EEOC Regulations state, in pertinent part, that the agency shall develop an impartial and
appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised by a complainant
and defines an appropriate factual record as one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw
conclusions as to whether discrimination occurred. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b).

Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
Chap. 1, § IV.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) provides that agencies must avoid conflicts of position or
conflicts of interest, as well as the appearance of such conflicts. For example, the same agency
official(s) responsible for executing and advising on personnel actions may not also be
responsible for managing, advising, or overseeing the EEO pre-complaint and complaint process.
Id.

EEO MD-110 Chap. 1, Chap. 9 § IV.B.2. also provides that when an employee files a complaint
alleging discrimination by the EEO Director or another supervisor in the EEO office, a real or
perceived conflict may exist because the interests of the responding official would challenge the
objectivity or perceived objectivity of the EEO office. This matter must be addressed through
procedures designed to safeguard the integrity of the EEO complaint process. Id. For example,
when an EEO complaint alleges that the EEO Director or a member of his/her immediate staff
discriminated, the EEO Director shall recuse himself/herself and retain a third party to conduct
the counseling, and investigation and draft the final agency decision for the agency head to issue.
Id.

At the outset, we note that the Commission’s previous decision remanded this matter for the
Agency to provide additional information regarding the selection process for Vacancy No. 7783.
As a result of the information provided in the Agency’s two supplemental investigations, we find
the record in this case is fully developed and the matter is ripe for review.

Complainant named officials at the Office of Workforce Management in Washington, D.C. as
responsible management officials in the instant complaint. Specifically, in his affidavit he
named SO, EEO Director, as responsible for not selecting him for Vacancy No. 7783.

Upon review, we find no indication that the EEO Director tainted the EEO process and it appears
that the investigation of this matter by the ORMDI in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania was conducted by
an entity separate from the EEO Director’s Office. Further, it appears the Agency’s final
decision issued by OEDCA in Washington, D.C. was approved by an individual other than the
EEO Director. Additionally, we note there is no indication that the EEO Director had any
influence over the investigation or the final decision. Moreover, we find the record is
sufficiently developed for us to make a completely independent determination regarding whether
or not there was discrimination. However, the Agency is reminded it must comply with MD-110
in the future and make clear in the record that no conflict of interest exists. Cruz v. Dep’t of
Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 2020000131 (July 28, 2021), request for reconsideration denied,
EEOC Request No. 2021004808 (Jan. 25, 2022).
                                               5                                   2022000092

    Vacancy Announcement No. 7783

The Human Resource Specialist (HRS) assessed the submitted application materials for
minimum qualifications and referred fourteen qualified candidates for consideration. The SO
assigned an EEO Manager at the VA Medical Center in Washington, D.C. (EEO Manager 1) and
the Lead EEO Manager at the VISN 5 VA Capital Health Care Network in Linthicum, Maryland
(EEO Manager 2) to review and rank the fourteen qualified candidates. The five highest scoring
applicants were referred for interviews. EEO Manager 1 and EEO Manager 2 rated the
applicants using the four factors identified in the Knowledge, Skills, Abilities (KSAs) required
for the job. For each KSA, applicants were assigned between one and five points. The point
values were then totaled and averaged. The five highest rated applicants were referred for an
interview. Complainant was not rated among the five highest scoring applicants and thus, was
not referred for an interview.

An interview panel was formed to conduct initial interviews. The panel consisted of EEO
Manager 1, EEO Manager 2 2, and EEO Manager 3. SO was not a member of the interview panel
which conducted the first round of interview. Following the interviews for the top five
applicants, the three highest scoring interviewees were referred to SO for a second interview.
SO conducted the second round of interviews and the Selectee was chosen.

Generally, claims of disparate treatment are examined under the tripartite analysis first
enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Hochstadt v. Worcester
Found, for Experimental Biology. Inc., 425 F. Supp. 318, 324 (D. Mass.), aff'd, 545 F.2d 222
(1st Cir. 1976). For Complainant to prevail, she must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978).

Once a complainant has established a prima facie case, the burden of production then shifts to
the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep't of
Com. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). If the Agency is successful, the burden
reverts back to Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the
Agency's reason(s) for its action was a pretext for discrimination. At all times, Complainant
retains the burden of persuasion, and it is her obligation to show by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Center v.
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 509 (1993); U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711,
715-16 (1983).




2
  The record reveals that EEO Manager 2 withdrew from the interview panel due to a family
emergency. Her partially completed interview scores were not used when ranking Applicants 1-
5 during the first round of interviews.
                                                6                                    2022000092

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711. 713-714 (1983); Complainant v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990).

In the present case, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
EEO Manager 1 and EEO Manager 2 referred the top five applicants to the first round of
interviews. They determined Complainant’s application materials did not reflect the same level
of expertise, skills, and experience as the top five applicants, particularly with respect to:
national and/or VISN (Regional) level lead experience; engaging in national level EEO
workgroups, committees, and projects; and advising senior level management. Additionally,
EEO Manager 2 found that Complainant’s resume reflected only three years of experience as an
EEO Manager, “in a collateral capacity.”

In an attempt to prove pretext, Complainant speculates that SO was involved in the initial rating
and ranking of applicants; however, the evidence in the record reveals that EEO Manager 1 and
EEO Manager 2 performed this function, without involvement by SO. Complainant claims SO
improperly failed to consider his resume. However, given SO was not involved in the scoring of
Complainant’s application and the fact that Complainant was not referred to SO for the first
round of interviews, there was no need for SO to review Complainant’s resume. Complainant’s
claim that SO failed to adequately address the employment barriers faced by Caucasian males,
without more, is insufficient to prove that the SO singled him out for nonselection based on any
of his protected bases.

Complainant’s scores as determined by EEO Manager 1 and EEO Manager 2 were not high
enough to place him among the top five candidates. Even if Complainant is correct about some
computational errors in the scoring, he still would not have placed high enough to qualify in the
top five necessary to move on to the first interview stage. Regarding his contention that he
should have received more points in some of the rating categories because of his “Outstanding”
performance ratings over eight of the last ten years, we note that performance ratings was not a
factor given weight in the scoring. Regarding his contention that he had greater education than
the Selectee, we find that graduate degrees were not listed as qualifications, competencies, or
even preferences for the position at issue.

Complainant also contends that EEO Manager 2 erred in assessing his prior work experience
since she said his resume reflected three years of EEO Manager experience, but he claims his
resume showed 10 years of EEO Manager experience and he attributes EEO Manager 2’s actions
to be discriminatory animus. A review of Complainant’s resume shows that for the three years
preceding his application, his position of record was Health System Specialist. He listed that he
performed a variety of functions including serving as the facility’s EEO Manager.
                                                7                                    2022000092

Complainant identified his job preceding the Health System Specialist position as an
Administrative Officer which he held for approximately six years and listed that he “performed
exact same duties as listed in the above Health System Specialist position. Please refer to the
Health Specialist description.” Complainant did not list any other specific EEO-related
experience. In contrast, the Selectee listed approximately 26 years of EEO-related experience,
including approximately twelve years as an EEO Manager, two years as the Director of Diversity
at a private facility, five years as an EEO Specialist, and seven years as an EEO investigator. In
these roles, the Selectee: developed an internal complaint process; developed a tracking tool for
sexual harassment complainants; served on national EEO committees; advised senior level
officials; and, conceptualized and delivered national training for VHA EEO Managers. Even if
EEO Manager 2 erred in concluding that Complainant’s resume reflected only three years, as
opposed to approximately nine years of related EEO experience in a collateral capacity, we find
Complainant has not demonstrated that his qualifications were plainly superior to those of the
Selectee. Further, we find that EEO Manager 2’s decision to credit only three years of EEO
Manager experience to be reasonable and not discriminatory.

Further, we find Complainant has not shown his knowledge, skills, and experience were plainly
superior to the other four applicants who were referred to the first round of interviews. The
record reflects that Applicants 1 and 4 each had ten years of experience in their position of
record which was EEO Manager; Applicant 3 had five years of experience where her position of
record was EEO Manager; and, Applicant 2’s resume reflects two years of experience in which
his position of record was EEO Manager. Their application materials do not indicate that their
EEO Manager duties were a collateral assignment – that is, in addition to the primary duties
associated with their position of record – as Complainant’s resume seemed to indicate.

The record further reflects that Applicants 1 - 4 each offered extensive experience developing
national and/or VISN level EEO training, engaging in national level EEO workgroups,
committees, and projects, advising senior level management, and providing EEO assessment and
improvements at Agency facilities – which were the primary elements of the advertised position.

Upon review, we find Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons were untrue. We find the record does not support Complainant’s
argument that SO orchestrated his nonselection because he is a White male, that his
qualifications were superior to those possessed by the Selectee, or that discriminatory bias
otherwise influenced the evaluation of his application materials.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.
                                                8                                    2022000092

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                9                                     2022000092

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 28, 2022
Date
