              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                           Darren M., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                          Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service
                                   (Field Areas and Regions),
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2022001260

                                     Appeal No. 2020004115

                                   Agency No. 4E-800-0133-19

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020004115 (November 22, 2021).
EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a City Carrier at the Agency’s Valmont Station
in Boulder, Colorado.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, claiming unlawful retaliation for prior protected activity
when he received a Notice of Removal for Failure to be Regular in Attendance and Failure to
Follow Instructions; he was not provided with the materials and equipment necessary to perform
his job duties; he was not allowed to address issues with his route, such as Delivery Point
Sequence and Flats Sequencing System mail being out of order or given time to organize two


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2022001260

years of change of address labels for his route; he was told that he was not allowed out of his
mail case without his supervisor’s permission; management insulted him by calling him
“irrational,” “abnormal,” and a “liar;” he was yelled at on the workroom floor rather than being
called into the office; he was told that he would no longer be given any assistance on his route
and, if he asked for assistance in any way, he would be given discipline for disobeying orders; all
of his accrued sick and annual leave were taken from him and he was charged Leave Without
Pay whenever he requested leave; when he asked his supervisor about his missing leave, he told
him that babies that cry to EEO no longer received federal benefits and, if he did not like it, he
could quit; Complainant’s start time was moved to an hour later than his co-workers; and
Complainant’s supervisor was verbally abusive and ridiculed him when he told him that he was
going home on stress leave.

After an investigation, Complainant did not request a hearing or a final agency decision within
the applicable time period. Therefore, the Agency issued a final decision, concluding the
evidence of record did not establish any discrimination or retaliation as alleged. Complainant
appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2020004115, the Commission affirmed the Agency’s final order
implementing the AJ’s finding of no unlawful retaliation was established.

In the instant request for reconsideration, we have carefully reviewed Complainant’s arguments
and determine that the matters either were raised or could have been raised below. We
emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap.
9 § VI.A (Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736
(Aug. 20, 2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the
appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have
a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020004115 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title.
                                                3                                    2022001260

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 14, 2022
Date
