             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Lyda F., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                     Merrick B. Garland,
                                      Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                              (Drug Enforcement Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021001771

                                 Hearing No. 570-2016-00279X

                      Agency Nos. DEA-2015-01407 & DEA-2016-01045

                                           DECISION

On January 19, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), to a final agency
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the
Agency’s final order. 2




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  Here, an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) issued a decision on September 30, 2020, and the
Agency failed to issue a final order within 40 days of the AJ’s decision. On January 19, 2021,
Complainant filed an appeal of the AJ’s decision, to which the Agency filed opposition.
Consistent with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(i), if an agency does not issue a final order within 40 days
of receipt of the AJ’s decision in accordance with 1614.110, then the decision of the AJ becomes
the final action of the agency.
                                                2                                    2021001771


                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Project
Management Specialist (PMS), GS-12, in the Administrative Operations Section, Property
Management Unit (SAOP) at Agency Headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. Complainant lived in
Spotsylvania, Virginia, which is more than 60 miles away.

Complainant was scheduled to have back surgery on October 27, 2014, and requested telework
and leave to accommodate her recovery period through November 19, 2014. During that period,
management approved Complainant to telework four hours per day and utilize accrued leave,
advance leave, or leave without pay for the remainder of her workday.

On April 27, 2015, Complainant filed an EEO complaint (identified as Agency No. DEA-2015-
01407) alleging that the Agency, between 2013 and 2015, subjected her to discrimination and
harassment on the bases of disability (30% Disabled Veteran, Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy
(RSD), Sciatica, back and ankle injury) when:

       1.      between March and December 2014, and in January 2015, management
               denied Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation (teleworking
               eight hours per day and making adjustments to allow her to do so);
       2.      since October 22, 2014, management reduced Complainant’s work hours
               and duties and denied her request for teleworking eight hours per day by
               taking away her essential duties;
       3.      in September 2014, management gave Complainant a “Successful”
               performance rating, citing absences as impacting her rating;
       4.      on October 27, 2014 and in February 2015, management prevented
               Complainant from attending trainings and meetings;
       5.      in 2013 and 2014, the Section Chief (S1) made hostile comments about
               Complainant and her disability in the presence of coworkers, including
               calling Complainant her “ghost employee” due to her absences; and
       6.      in 2013 and 2014, management would not allow Complainant to make up
               missed time, but her coworkers were allowed to do so.

Subsequently, Complainant filed another EEO complaint (identified as Agency No. DEA-2016-
01045) reiterating her allegations of harassment, denial of reasonable accommodation, and
adding that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of disability and reprisal for prior
EEO activity when, since August 2015:

       7.      management required Complainant to submit all UFMS document reviews
               to the SAOP inbox, unlike her peers, and then did not give Complainant
               credit for her work;
       8.      the Secretary, who is a contractor, changed and signed Complainant’s time
               and attendance without her knowledge and management approved it;
                                                3                                   2021001771

       9.     management left Complainant out of meetings, peer discussions, emails,
              and decisions;
       10.    management failed to timely process Complainant’s step increase;
       11.    management caused deliberate delays in processing of Complainant’s
              workers’ compensation claims;
       12.    management attempted to change Complainant’s duty hours; and
       13.    management failed to respond to her request for an SNS laptop and
              Agency telephone.

The Agency accepted Complainant’s two complaints and consolidated them for EEO
investigation and further processing.

Following the investigation, the Agency informed Complainant of the right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) or an immediate final agency decision. Complainant
requested the former. Complainant elected to make a hearing request.

The assigned AJ issued a decision by summary judgment concluding Complainant failed to
establish discrimination or unlawful retaliation as alleged. The AJ found that Complainant failed
to prove the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons articulated by the Agency’s management
witnesses for the disputed actions were a pretext masking discrimination, that the Agency denied
her reasonable accommodation, or that the actions alleged rose to the level of a hostile work
environment. In pertinent part, the AJ found that the Agency approved Complainant’s multiple
requests to extend her teleworking beyond November 2014; allowed her to telework and use
accrued leave, advance leave, and leave without pay; only reduced her teleworking to two hours
per day based on the work she was completing; allowed her to work additional hours when
possible; and identified alternate worksites for Complainant to report to on some days but
Complainant failed to provide requested information for the alternate site. As to alleged
comments by S1, the AJ stated that Complainant failed to show severe or pervasive conduct by
S1, and that S2 could not recall the full content of S1’s comments.

The instant appeal from Complainant followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission's regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is
“genuine” if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-
moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp.,
846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the
outcome of the case. In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and
factual conclusions, and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo.
                                                4                                     2021001771

See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a)(stating that a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action
shall be based on a de novo review…”); see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO-MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (as revised, August 5,
2015)(providing that an administrative judge’s determination to issue a decision without a
hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed de novo).

In order to successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a complainant must identify,
with specificity, facts in dispute either within the record or by producing further supporting
evidence and must further establish that such facts are material under applicable law. Such a
dispute would indicate that a hearing is necessary to produce evidence to support a finding that
the agency was motivated by discriminatory animus. Here, however, Complainant has failed to
establish such a dispute. Even construing any inferences raised by the undisputed facts in favor
of Complainant, a reasonable fact-finder could not find in Complainant’s favor.

Reasonable Accommodation

Under the Commission's regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o)
and (p).

After receiving a request for reasonable accommodation, the employer should engage in an
informal process with the disabled individual to clarify what the individual needs and identify the
appropriate reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation), EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (October 17, 2002); see
also, Abeijon v. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120080156 (Aug. 8, 2012).
Protected individuals are entitled to reasonable accommodation, but they are not necessarily
entitled to their accommodation of choice. Castaneda v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No.
01931005 (February 17, 1994).

During the investigation, Complainant stated, on March 1, 2011, she injured herself at work on a
soapy, marble tile floor and sustained additional injuries to her knees, ankles, legs, feet, back,
and hand. She filed a claim with the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) on
March 3, 2011. Complainant stated that she has difficulty with prolonged standing or sitting,
bending, climbing stairs, walking and lifting. Complainant stated that participating in the
aforementioned activities for more than 5 to 10 minutes causes her great pain and she has to
continuously alternate between sitting and standing. Complainant has difficulty driving distances
over 30 minutes from her home. Complainant stated that when she teleworks, she can use ice and
lumbar pillows to assist with the pain. Complainant stated that she has difficulty wearing shoes
due to pain, and that she deals with anxiety. Complainant stated that she has foot numbness and
walks with a cane.
                                                 5                                     2021001771

For allegations (1) and (2), Complainant’s direct supervisor, the Unit Chief (S2), stated, in
August 2014, the Agency approved four hours of telework daily (no weekends or holidays) for
Complainant because the nature of their work (property verification, providing classroom
training, and obtaining “wet signatures” 3) does not allow all work to be completed remotely and
there were security protocols related to printing and protection of information. S2 stated that
Complainant’s telework hours began in October 2014 following her surgery, 4 are still in place,
and have been adjusted as appropriate. S2 noted that Complainant requested eight hours of
telework per day and she was given four per day. Complainant was later given two hours per day
when management determined that Complainant was processing no more than two hours of work
per day teleworking. S2 stated that Complainant is the only employee allowed to telework daily
and that other employees are only allowed situational or inclement weather telework.

The investigative record contains the documents that follow in pertinent part.

    •   Telework Agreement dated October 23, 2014, allowing telework Monday through
        Friday from October 27, 2014 to October 27, 2015.

    •   Telework Agreement dated February 10, 2015, allowing telework Monday
        through Friday through December 31, 2015.

    •   May 14, 2015 letter from spinal doctor stating, “It may be necessary for
        [Complainant] . . . to come into work late by several hours approximately three to
        four times per pay period (two weeks) secondary to decreased function from her
        diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome.”

    •   A June 24, 2015 Functional Capacity Evaluation, stating “[Complainant]would
        have trouble returning to her regular job at this time due to the amount of driving
        and walking necessary.”

    •   Request for Accommodation response letter, dated June 27, 2015, from S2 stating
        that Complainant could not work at the Agency’s Stafford, Virginia location as an
        alternative work site due to classified information security concerns. S2 stated that
        Complainant could temporarily work at the Agency warehouse to assist her with
        transitioning back to working at the Headquarters facility. S2 stated that there are
        responsibilities that can not be performed at the Warehouse and that coworkers
        would have to perform Complainant’s duties if she remained at the Warehouse.



3
  A Lead PMS reiterated that they generally do not use digital signatures for documents so the
signer, such as S2, has to provide a wet signature.
4
  Complainant was initially scheduled to return to full-duty on November 20, 2014 from back
surgery.
                                                 6                                     2021001771

Assuming, without finding, that Complainant is an individual with a disability within the
meaning of the Rehabilitation Act, we find that Complainant has not shown that the Agency
failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation. Complainant was scheduled to have
back surgery on October 27, 2014 and requested telework and leave to accommodate her
recovery period through November 19, 2014. During that period, management approved
Complainant to telework four hours per day and utilize accrued leave, advance leave, or leave
without pay for the remainder of her workday. After November 19, Complainant asked to
continue teleworking due to her medical conditions and to do so for eight hours per day. The
Agency stated that management approved four hours of telework daily for Complainant because
the nature of their work does not allow all work to be completed remotely and there were
security protocols related to printing and protection of information. PMS work included property
verification, providing classroom training, and obtaining “wet signatures” on documents. The
Agency stated that it afforded Complainant additional hours of telework when it was available
and that it extended Complainant’s teleworking multiple times and allowed her to use leave or
leave without pay for the remainder of the time. The Agency reduced Complainant’s daily
teleworking to two hours per day when it determined that Complainant was not processing more
than two hours of work per day. The Agency noted that Complainant was the only PMS who
teleworked daily as most PMS telework was situational. The Agency offered Complainant the
ability to telework from an Agency location closer to her home but noted that the change would
be temporary because some of SAOP’s work could not be performed at the warehouse.

Based on the instant record, we find that the Agency did not discriminate against Complainant in
violation of the Rehabilitation Act with regard to her accommodation requests.

Disparate Treatment

 A claim of disparate treatment based on indirect evidence is examined under the three-part
analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For
Complainant to prevail, he or she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The
burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep’t. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the Agency
has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St.
Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination.
                                                 7                                     2021001771

U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v.
Dep’t. of Transp., EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep’t. of Health
and Human Serv., EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep’t. of the
Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Here, we conclude that management witnesses proffered legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons
for the disputed actions.

Regarding allegation (3), S2 stated that Complainant ranked “Excellent” in “Customer Service”
and “Individual Work Productivity” and “Successful” in “Technical Competence/Results,”
“Communication,” and “Information Analysis and Problem Solving.” S2 stated that he was
Complainant’s rating official and she received an overall rating of “Successful” based on her
actual work performance, not her disability. S2 stated that Complainant would have to exceed
performance standards to get higher ratings and he suggested she attend development training to
increase her knowledge, skills, and abilities. S2 stated that a quality review is conducted on every
property report before he signs it and it gives him the opportunity to know his staff’s work and
have constant dialogue with them.

With regard to allegation (4), S2 stated that Fleet Training was for PMS staff working on a
specific project which Complainant was not working on. S2 stated that Complainant worked on
daily routine assignments and management of office inbox workflow.

For allegation (6), S2 stated that employees generally have to use accrued leave when they are
absent from work, but he occasionally allows employees to arrive early or stay beyond normal
departing time. He stated that he assigned Complainant projects and additional assignments she
could perform from home to help her earn additional hours. S2 stated, in April 2015,
Complainant requested accommodation of working at an alternate location closer to her home.
S2 stated that he was awaiting medical documentation specifying requirements for the alternate
location.

Further, for allegation (7), S2 asked Complainant to submit inquiries to the SAOP inbox before
rejecting acquisition requests because he thought it more efficient to use email rather than phone
calls for inquiries and that he gives credit for special projects but not routine daily work.
Regarding allegation (8), he said each employee submits their own time and attendance to the
Agency database but there were errors in Complainant’s and she was not at a location to correct
the errors in time so the Program Support Specialist was asked to make the corrections for her.
Regarding allegation (9), management witnesses asserted Complainant was included in
decisions, peer meetings, trainings, discussions, and the daily operations of the Agency.
Regarding allegation (10), management stated that an employee must have a required time-in-
grade for an increase to the next step, Complainant received her step 4 in November 2013, and
Complainant had less creditable service between November 2013 and January 2015 due to leave
without pay usage. For allegation (11), management witnesses claimed they reviewed and
returned Complainant’s OWCP information within days of receiving it.
                                                 8                                     2021001771

For allegation (12), there was a need to address West Coast Office hours with an employee who
could work 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. and all PMS staff were asked to do so. And finally, with
regard to allegation (13), the testimony was Complainant would have to come into headquarters
to pick up a laptop and would be contacted about Agency cell phone distribution when it
occurred.

The weight of the evidence supports the AJ’s determination that Complainant failed to prove, by
a preponderance of the evidence, that the reasons proffered by management for the disputed
actions were a pretext designed to mask discriminatory or retaliatory motivations.

Hostile Work Environment

To prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to conduct
that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s position
would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the
conduct was taken because of a protected basis – in this case, her disability or engagement in
protected activity (requesting reasonable accommodation). Only if Complainant establishes both
of those elements – hostility and motive – will the question of Agency liability present itself. See
Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510
U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also, Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC
Notice No. 915.002 (March 8, 1994).

Here, we have already concluded that Complainant has failed to establish any discriminatory or
retaliatory motivation for the vast majority of the allegations she provided in support of her
overall hostile work environment harassment claim. Therefore, we will not consider them further
in examining Complainant’s claim. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No.
01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000). With regard to allegation (5), S2 acknowledged hearing S1, who is
no longer with the Agency, make statements such as: “which body part are you having trouble
with today . . . we all have injuries but still managed to come to work,” “[a]re you going to be
here [Complainant]?” and “if you were ever here you would know that.” Another coworker
recalled S1 making a sarcastic remark to Complainant. The evidence also established that
Complainant freely talked about her injuries and workers’ compensation claims in the office.
Without more, we find adequate support for the AJ’s conclusion that although S1’s purported
statements to Complainant were inappropriate and unbecoming of a management official, these
isolated comments alone were not sufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a hostile work
environment in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final decision finding no discrimination.
                                               9                                    2021001771

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                10                                    2021001771

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 26, 2022
Date
