             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Paul D., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                         Secretary,
                                   Department of Defense
                           (Defense Contract Management Agency),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2021003191

                            Agency Nos. P6-19-003 & P6-19-0094

                                          DECISION

On May 10, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 19, 2021 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Quality Assurance
Engineer, GS-12, at the Agency’s Raytheon Tewksbury facility in Tewksbury, Massachusetts.

On June 1, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of disability (AIDS/HIV, Major Depressive Disorder, Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder, Brain Tumor, and Chronic Kidney Disease) and reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity (prior complaints and 2017 reasonable accommodation request) when:

       1. In December 2016, Complainant was denied internet service fees ($54.95).



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2021003191

       2. On February 9, 2017, Complainant was denied use of administrative leave
          during a “state of emergency” snowstorm and required him to use annual
          leave instead.

       3. On February 14, 2017, Complainant was denied the                     reasonable
          accommodation of telework and extra time for assignments.

       4. Between February 15, 2017 and February 22, 2017, Complainant was placed
          on indefinite administrative leave and prohibited him from entering the
          facility after he declined their offer of loans, grants, and extra time off.

       5. On February 21, 2017, Complainant’s security clearance was suspended, and
          he was placed on administrative leave pending a mental health evaluation.

       6. Between January 2016 and May 2017, Complainant was subjected to hostile
          work environment harassment when the Agency required medical
          documentation to Federal Occupational Health (FOH) and released
          confidential medical information, denied Complainant union membership,
          failed to address security concerns with Complainant’s home internet service,
          had Complainant work in a facility with a high concentration of
          electromagnetic radiation, failed to provide clarification for his medical
          insurance coverage, and failed to provide necessary hearing tests.

       7. Between July 31, 2017 and August 1, 2017, Complainant’s vision and dental
          insurance was cancelled, and the Agency reported his income as 0 to
          unemployment insurance.

       8. Complainant was removed from employment effective July 14, 2017, citing
          “medical inability to do job.” 2

During the investigation, Complainant’s Supervisor (S1) stated: (1) per Complainant’s December
22, 2016 telework agreement, internet fees were not reimbursable for situational telework; (2) all
employees had the right to either take annual leave or telework (if they had a telework
agreement) during inclement weather when the Agency remains open; (3) there was no denial of
accommodation - S1 informed Complainant that he needed to discuss reasonable accommodation
with Labor Relations because management should not be involved with his medical information
but that they could discuss informal accommodations when he came into the office; (4)


2
  In July 2018, Complainant filed a civil action and the Agency dismissed the instant complaints.
However, in a letter dated August 19, 2019, the Agency reinstated Complainant’s claims, stating
the civil action did not contain the incidents herein. The Agency noted that claim (8), regarding
removal, was a mixed case matter with appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board
(MSPB). Notably, MSPB does not have record of an appeal regarding Complainant’s July 2017
removal.
                                                3                                    2021003191

management placed Complainant on administrative leave after he “exhibited erratic and
concerning behavior which reached a climax the week of February 14, 2017” so that the
Agency’s Consolidated Adjudication Facility (CAF) could investigate the matter further.

For (4), S1 stated further that Complainant expressed that he was having financial issues and
lacked appropriate housing, food, and medication so he contacted Complainant for a wellness
check and to inform him about loan and grant resources that might be helpful to him. S1 stated
that he also previously suggested Complainant contact the Employee Assistance Program (EAP).
As to (5), S1 stated that management placed Complainant on administrative leave and suspended
his access to classified information pending a mental health evaluation due to the nature of his
behavior around February 14, 2017.

Regarding (6), concerning hostile work environment harassment, S1 stated that management sent
Complainant a formal request for medical information to be completed and provided to FOH due
to Complainant’s erratic behavior in February. S1 stated, on March 6, 2017, Complainant
confirmed his intent to submit. S1 stated that management does not handle union membership,
but Complainant sent an email to the Facility Commander informing him that no union dues
deductions were made to his payroll. Complainant’s office was in a contractors’ facility that has
a highly-controlled area for x-rays, but Complainant did not have access to that area and did not
work in such a space that he needs to wear a radiation dosimeter to monitor. On February 14,
2017, Complainant reported trouble with his insurance card and S1 instructed Complainant to
contact his insurance provider for assistance. S1 stated, on January 22, 2017, Complainant
reported staying at his residence without utilities and that his neighbor was playing music at a
high frequency so he needed a hearing test. S1 informed Complainant that the matter was not
work-related and he should contact a doctor.

Regarding (7), S1 stated that he did not cancel Complainant’s insurance. As to (8), S1 stated that
the Agency removed Complainant from employment because, following an FOH assessment,
FOH determined that Complainant could not perform the essential functions of his Quality
Assurance Engineer position or maintain the required security clearance.

In pertinent part, the investigative record contains the following documents:

       •   Email, dated February 14, 2017, from Complainant to S1, titled “[S1] I am
           living out of my car . . . again.” Complainant questioned S1’s suggestion that
           EAP could help him with housing and stated that he had one more night in a
           hotel and then had to return to his home with a battery and a light.
           Complainant requested more time to complete his courses due to headaches,
           and stated that he could not telework because the email does not work.

       •   February 17, 2017 Suspension of Access to Classified Information and/or
           Occupancy of a Sensitive Position, pending mental health assessment by the
           Agency’s Consolidated Adjudication Facility and a favorable determination.
                                                4                                  2021003191

       •   A hospital summary of care, dated March 10, 2017, stating Complainant was
           in the hospital for two weeks between February 25, 2017 and March 7, 2017
           for “psychiatric problems.” The summary lists diagnoses including, “Behavior
           concern in adult . . . Unspecified psychosis [and] Methamphetamine abuse.” 3

       •   A Notice of Proposed Removal, dated May 5, 2017, citing “medical inability
           to perform your job.” The Agency stated that Complainant’s March 10
           medical documentation was forwarded to FOH to assess fitness for duty. On
           March 27, 2017, an Occupational Medicine Consultant determined that
           Complainant “would not be able perform the duties of a Quality Assurance
           Engineer or maintain a security clearance as would be required for your
           position.” The Agency cited methamphetamine abuse, unspecified psychosis,
           and potent psychiatric prescriptions from Complainant’s March 10 care
           summary.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination or unlawful retaliation as alleged.

The instant appeal from Complainant followed.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).



3
 The Agency stated that Complainant submitted his hospital medical documentation in an email,
unsolicited. Complainant acknowledged sending the hospital summary.
                                                 5                                     2021003191

For Complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The
burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its
actions. See Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products,
Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993);
Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Here, we find, assuming arguendo, Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination
based on disability or reprisal, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
its actions. The Agency stated (1) Complainant’s December 2016 telework agreement did not
provide internet fee reimbursement for situational telework; (2) use of annual leave or telework
(if an employee has a telework agreement) are options during inclement weather when the
Agency remains open; (3) the Agency did not deny Complainant accommodation but rather
informed him of the correct contact for formal accommodation and told him they could discuss
informal accommodations when he came into the office; (4) and (5) management placed
Complainant on administrative leave and suspended his access to classified information after he
“exhibited erratic and concerning behavior which reached a climax the week of February 14,
2017” and CAF had to investigate the matter further; and (7) the Agency did not cancel
Complainant’s insurance as alleged.

We find that Complainant failed to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the reasons
for the disputed actions proffered by Agency management witnesses were a pretext designed to
mask the true discriminatory or retaliatory motives for these events.

Harassment

To establish a claim of hostile environment harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) he
belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of
unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
                                                6                                    2021003191

complained of was based on his statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or
condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
(5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d
897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also,
Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (March 8,
1994).

Here, we find that Complainant failed to establish discriminatory harassment. Specifically, we
find that Complainant failed to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the actions
complained of were based on disability or reprisal. The Agency stated that it sent Complainant a
formal request for medical information to be completed and provided to FOH due to his erratic
behavior on February 14. The Agency noted that Complainant confirmed his intent to submit.
Additionally, the Agency stated that it does not handle union membership but wanted to assist
Complainant in resolving the issue; Complainant worked in a contractors’ facility that has a
highly-controlled area for x-rays, but Complainant did not have access to that area and did not
work in such a space that he needed to wear a radiation dosimeter; Complainant reported trouble
with his insurance card and management instructed him to contact his insurance provider for
assistance; and Complainant reported needing a hearing test after his neighbor played music at a
high frequency so management suggested he contact a doctor. Even if we consider, individually
and in total, the incidents occurred as alleged, we conclude that a finding of harassment is
precluded by our determination that Complainant failed to establish that the Agency’s actions
were motivated by discriminatory animus. See Harris, supra.

Removal

Here, the Agency issued Complainant a Notice of Proposed Removal, dated May 5, 2017, citing
“medical inability to perform your job.” The Agency stated that Complainant submitted
unsolicited medical documentation to management on March 10 and management forwarded the
information to FOH to assess fitness for duty. The medical documentation was a hospital care
summary following a two-week hospital stay for “psychiatric problems.” On March 27, 2017, an
Occupational Medicine Consultant determined that Complainant “would not be able perform the
duties of a Quality Assurance Engineer or maintain a security clearance as would be required for
[his] position.” The Consultant cited methamphetamine abuse, unspecified psychosis, and potent
psychiatric medication prescriptions from Complainant’s March 10 care summary.

Employers may require a medical examination or make disability-related inquiries only if they
are job-related and consistent with business necessity. See Enforcement Guidance: Disability-
Related Inquiries and Medical Examinations of Employees under the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) (July 27, 2000) (web version) (Guidance). This requirement is met when
the employer has a reasonable belief, based on objective evidence, that: (1) an employee’s ability
to perform the essential job functions is impaired by a medical condition; or (2) that an employee
poses a direct threat due to a medical condition. Id., at 5.
                                                 7                                     2021003191

This means that the employer must have a reasonable belief based on objective evidence that an
employee will be unable to perform the essential functions of his job because of a medical
condition. Objective evidence is reliable information, either directly observed or provided by a
credible third party, that an employee may have or has a medical condition that will interfere
with his ability to perform essential job functions or will result in a direct threat. Id. Where the
employer forms such a belief, its disability-related inquiries and medical examinations are job-
related and consistent with business necessity, if they seek only the information necessary to
determine whether the employee can perform the essential functions or work without posing a
direct threat to self or others. Id. It is the burden of the employer to show that its disability-
related inquiries and requests for medical examination are job-related and consistent with
business necessity. See Cerge v. U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No.
0120060363 (Oct. 9, 2007).

Here, we find that the Agency had a reasonable belief based on objective evidence, the March
10, 2017 Summary of Care that Complainant provided, because of his mental health conditions,
Complainant might not have been able to safely perform the essential functions of his job and/or
that he posed a direct threat to himself and others. Specifically, the record reflects that
Complainant had a two-week hospital stay (February 25, 2017 through March 7, 2017) for
“psychiatric problems” and the diagnoses included “Behavior concern in adult . . . Unspecified
psychosis, [and] Methamphetamine abuse.” The circumstances of this case support the Agency’s
action of forwarding the objective evidence to FOH for a fitness for duty determination and
subsequently removing Complainant from employment. (Complainant’s removal was effective
July 14, 2017.) Accordingly, we find that the Agency’s actions did not violate the Rehabilitation
Act.

Further, assuming without finding that Complainant is an individual with a disability within the
meaning of the Rehabilitation Act, we find that Complainant has not shown that the Agency
failed to provide him reasonable accommodation. Complainant requested additional time to
complete his coursework and management stated that they could discuss when he was in the
office, but Complainant never returned to the office. And, Complainant stated that he could not
telework because of email issues. Again, we find that the Agency’s actions did not violate the
Rehabilitation Act.
                                               8                                    2021003191

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final agency decision finding no discrimination or
unlawful retaliation.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                9                                     2021003191

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 13, 2022
Date
