             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Heriberto P., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                        Frank Kendall,
                                          Secretary,
                                  Department of the Air Force,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020005181

                                   Agency No. 9X1M16011

                                          DECISION

On August 20, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
final decision, dated May 25, 2020, concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Command Country
Manager (Japan), GS-1101-13, for the Agency’s Pacific Section; Americas, South East Asia and
Pacific Branch; International Division; Air Force Security Assistance and Cooperation
Directorate; Airforce Life Cycle Management Center (AFLCMC) at Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base (AFB), Ohio. His first-level supervisor was Pacific Section Chief, Supervisor (Supervisor),
and his second-level supervisor was Deputy Branch Chief (Deputy Chief).

On June 2, 2016, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the basis of race (Caucasian) when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2020005181

       1.      on January 15, 2016, he was moved from a quiet low bay workstation to a
               highly disruptive high bay workstation environment (adjacent to his
               supervisor’s office) with no notice, discussion or union notification;

       2.      on January 22, 2016, [Supervisor] verbally counseled him;

       3.      on numerous occasions [Supervisor] did not approve his physical fitness
               time [PT] and scheduled meetings so that he could not partake in [PT];

       4.      he was given a mid-term feedback which does not reflect his true
               performance;

       5.      [Supervisor] did not approve his credit hour request for hours needed to
               stay past the normal duty time in support of his assigned country, Japan;

Thereafter, Complainant submitted a request to amend his complaint to include additional
claims 2:

       6.      On August 26, 2016, he was denied his Weingarten Rights.

On October 12, 2016, the Agency accepted claim 6 for investigation along with claims 1 – 5.
The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

In claim 1, Complainant stated he was moved from his prior work station to one with a lot of
white noise that was right outside Supervisor’s office. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 132. 3
Co-Worker 1 (Caucasian), a co-worker of Complainant’s, was also moved to the same area. See
id.

2
  Complainant also alleged he was subjected to a hostile work environment when “during the
month of January 2016, he was physically moved, without proper notification to AFGE Local
1138, to a smaller location outside the office of [Supervisor].” Reasoning that this was the same
claim as set forth in claim 1, the Agency dismissed the proposed amendment pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1). Additionally, Complainant sought to include the claim that, on August
26, 2016, he received a Notice of Proposed Reprimand. The Agency dismissed this claim on the
grounds that it alleged a proposed personnel action, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(5).
Thereafter, the Agency included the proposed reprimand as part of claim 6. Since Complainant
does not challenge the dismissals on appeal, we exercise our discretion and shall not address the
matter herein. See EEOC Management Directive on 29 C.F.R. 1614 (MD-110), at Ch. 9, §VI.A
(Nov. 9, 1999).
3
  We note that the pages of the ROI are stamped with two sets of numbers. Our citations are to
the numbers that begin in 000. For brevity’s sake, we refer herein to the last 3 digits only. For
example, page 000132 will be referred to as page 132.
                                              3                                   2020005181

Complainant believed this was due to his race because of a combination of other things that
followed, including Supervisor’s desire to have her thumb on him and Co-Worker 1. ROI at 132-
33. Complainant stated that none of Supervisor’s eight other employees (some Caucasian) were
treated this way. ROI at 132.
Supervisor said she was told by her first-line supervisor, Deputy Chief, and Branch Chief that
her office would be moved so she could be closer to her employees. ROI at 139. Because of her
move, Complainant and Co-Worker 1 would need to be moved. See id.
Deputy Chief confirmed that he and Branch Chief directed the decision to move Complainant.
ROI at 148-49. The reason was to put everyone together. See id. Human Resources (HR)
Specialist added that employees are not involved in the decision process for such moves. ROI at
165.
In claim 2, Complainant declared Supervisor verbally counseled him, behind closed doors, for
not having his Instant Messenger (IM) on the prior day; 4 for being late “one day” that he
contended was not specified; and for not being in his cubicle for 45 minutes, supposedly
“sometime last year.” ROI at 133. Complainant maintained if he knew he were going to be
written up, he would have had his union representative attend the meeting and that Supervisor
denied him his Weingarten rights. See id. When asked why he thought this was based on his
race, Complainant said he could think of no other reason for Supervisor harassing him. See id.
However, he also thought Supervisor was mad about his sending an email the previous Friday
regarding the move of his work space. See id.
Supervisor acknowledged that she verbally counseled Complainant. ROI at 140. She said that
she consulted HR and was told she could require Complainant to keep his IM on. See id. On
another occasion, Supervisor said Complainant was 30 minutes late. ROI at 141. Regarding the
time Complainant was away from his cubicle for 45 minutes, Supervisor said that, when
something was needed from Complainant that the General had requested, Complainant was at a
Starbucks with Co-Worker 1. ROI at 140. According to Supervisor, no Weingarten
representative was needed because Complainant was not being disciplined, simply verbally
counseled. ROI at 141. Supervisor acknowledged she had verbally counseled three other
Caucasian employees, but asserted that her counseling of Complainant was not due to his race
nor the email he had sent. See id.
In claim 3, Complainant alleged Supervisor did not approve his PT and scheduled meetings so
that he could not participate in PT. Further, Complainant contended Supervisor sat on his
requests and did not let him know in a timely fashion if she would deny them. ROI at 133-34.
She scheduled meetings for the afternoons, at the time he had requested for his PT. ROI at 134.
According to Complainant, Supervisor would not show up to the meetings or they were not
official. See id.

4
  While Complainant’s Declaration used the term “Instant Manager,” we assume that he meant
“Instant Messenger.”
                                               4                                   2020005181

Furthermore, on one occasion, Supervisor changed Complainant’s timesheet to reflect an hour of
AWOL for the time he was at PT. See id. Complainant believed this was racial harassment,
because he could not see any other reason for Supervisor’s actions. See id.
According to Supervisor, Complainant was missing meetings due to his PT. ROI at 141. While
she previously did not allow Complainant, or others, to take their PT if they had incomplete
work, Supervisor “eventually changed [her] position”, and provided advanced approval of
Complainant’s PT. If his work was not complete, Supervisor would “make a note of it and take
appropriate action if necessary.” ROI at 141-42. When asked if her actions were due to
Complainant’s race, Supervisor maintained they were related to Complainant’s presence to
complete his work and having his leave approved by his supervisor. Id. at 142.
In claim 4, Complainant averred that he was given mid-term performance feedback that did not
accurately reflect his true performance. He put forward that he was performing supervisory
work during the rating period of October 16, 2015, to February 17, 2016, and most people who
did such work would receive at least a middle or higher range rating. ROI at 134. Instead, he
stated, almost all of his ratings were marked lower. See id. Moreover, Complainant averred,
there was feedback that was not an accurate portrayal of his performance, including items that
were not part of his job. Complainant stated these included: changing his core hours for a
teleconference call outside of work hours; obtaining prior approval for credit hours; seeking
Supervisor’s approval before going to PT; and taking Japanese visitors directly to the General’s
office when he did not do so. ROI at 134-35. Complainant indicated that Supervisor also gave
him feedback that he thought actually applied to Co-Worker 1. ROI at 135. Complainant was
also told by Supervisor that Complainant was fighting leadership, which he claimed was untrue.
See id.
Supervisor declared her feedback was based on what she observed of Complainant’s work
performance. ROI at 142. She said that she mentioned to Complainant during the mid-term
evaluation meeting that he was reluctant in adapting to changes imposed by leadership;
constantly argued with her; and told her not do what leadership instructed. Id. Moreover,
Supervisor stated that she gave the rest of her staff, who were Caucasian, the same or similar
feedback. Id. She denied her action had anything to do with Complainant’s race. Id. at 143.
In claim 5, Complainant maintained Supervisor did not approve his credit hour request needed to
support his assigned country, Japan. As a result, argued Complainant, he was forced to
complete the work on his own time. ROI at 135. He further stated that Supervisor said he
should come in late or leave early to make up the time, but he was uncomfortable doing so for
fear that he would be charged AWOL again. Id. Complainant believed this was based on race
because he could not see any other reason for it. Id. at 136. Supervisor submitted that she does
not grant anyone credit hours. ROI at 143.
In claim 6, Complainant alleges he received a Notice of Proposed Reprimand (“Notice”) on
August 26, 2016, and was denied his Weingarten rights.
                                               5                                    2020005181

He maintained Supervisor pulled him away from his work and started reading him the Notice, in
the presence of a management witness. ROI at 136. He said when he asked Supervisor what the
meeting concerned, as he wanted to have his representative present, Supervisor ignored him
twice and kept reading the Notice. See id. When asked how this incident was based on his race,
Complainant simply replied that the alleged events were harassing and continuous. See id. He
further stated that he told the General in a meeting in October 2016 that he felt targeted,
harassed, and singled out. ROI at 136-37.
According to Supervisor, HR Specialist advised her that she did not have to provide Complainant
with the opportunity for representation. ROI at 143. HR Specialist declared that employees
should not be offered representation for this type of “one[-]way communication.” ROI at 166.
Deputy Chief confirmed this as well. ROI at 150.
Supervisor articulated that she herself had a witness present at Complainant’s meeting. ROI at
143. She also stated that she treated Co-Worker 1 and a female co-worker (Caucasian) (Co-
Worker 2) the same way during similar situations, though Supervisor acknowledged that she did
not have a witness present for Co-Worker 2 because it was a different type of letter. ROI at 143-
44. In response to a question on whether her action had anything to do with Complainant’s race,
Supervisor said her action was based on HR guidance. ROI at 144.
In Co-Worker 1’s opinion, Complainant was a good worker and Supervisor was a micromanager.
ROI at 154-55. He also stated that Complainant did not say, in so many words, that he felt he
was being discriminated against or harassed, though a lot of their conversations were about this
type of treatment. ROI. at 156.
Another co-worker (Caucasian) (Co-Worker 3) affirmed that Complainant was treated differently
and harassed by Supervisor, Deputy Chief, and Branch Chief. ROI at 159-60. Specifically, she
said Complainant was micromanaged and that they picked on him. See id. She felt Complainant
was being harassed. ROI at 160.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b).

The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. Specifically, the final agency decision (FAD) reiterated the dismissal
of two of the three amended claims. It also found that, with regard to claims 1, 2, and 5, the
Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its challenged actions that were not
proven to be a pretext for racial discrimination. The FAD further found that incidents in claims
3, 4, and 6 did not occur as alleged. Ultimately, the FAD concluded, Complainant did not
establish that he had been subjected to unwelcome conduct that was based on his race, and
therefore cannot establish that he was subjected to a discriminatory hostile work environment or
harassment on the basis of his race.
                                                6                                    2020005181

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant presents no arguments on appeal.

Regarding the dismissals, the Agency agrees that it properly dismissed claim 1 and improperly
dismissed claim 6, thus concurring with the FAD. For the first time, on appeal, the Agency
argues that claims 2 and 3 should be dismissed, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 1614.107(a)(4), because
Complainant has raised the matter in a negotiated grievance procedure that permits allegations of
discrimination. Alternatively, the Agency contends that all six claims fail to demonstrate
harassment. It points out that Complainant has submitted no evidence, documents, or statements
to show that the Agency erred in its factual or legal conclusions. Thus, the Agency asserts that
its FAD should be affirmed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Dismissals

We agree with the Agency that its dismissal of the proposed reprimand aspect of claim 6, was
improper. “Where a proposed Agency action is purportedly combined with other acts of
harassment to form a pattern of alleged harassment, an agency may not properly dismiss it on the
grounds that the claim concerns a proposed action.” Timika O. v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC
Appeal No. 2021004265 (Jan. 10, 2022). See also Sonkwa v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No.
0120133093 (Jan. 16, 2014), citing Settles v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05970496
(Apr. 8, 1999). Thus, we have considered claim 6 in our harassment analysis.

As to the Agency’s contention that claims 2 and 3 should be dismissed because they raise the
same issues that were brought up in a grievance procedure, it is inappropriate to raise additional
dismissal grounds for the first time on appeal. As the agency did not dismiss the instant
complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(4), we will not address this matter further. See,
e.g., Navarro and Montoya v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal Nos. 0120073150, 0120073153
(Oct. 3, 2007).
                                                7                                     2020005181

Disparate Treatment (Claims 1, 3, 4, and 5)

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n.13; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502
(1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

We find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
Regarding claim 1, Supervisor was required to move her office, which, in turn, necessitated
moving Complainant’s and Co-Worker 1’s work space. The reason was so that Supervisor could
be closer to her employees.

Regarding claim 3, Supervisor said that she changed her practice because, as a result of his PT,
Complainant was missing meetings. She would approve Complainant’s PT in advance, and if he
did not get work completed, Supervisor would make note of it and take appropriate action if
necessary. Supervisor stated her actions had to do with Complainant being present to complete
his work and having his leave approved by his supervisor.

Regarding claim 4, Supervisor declared that Complainant’s feedback for the relevant period was
based on what she observed of his work performance. For example, she noted that he was
reluctant in adapting to changes, constantly argued with her, and he told her not to do what
leadership said to do. She further stated that all of her staff, who were Caucasian, were given the
same or similar feedback. Complainant has not shown any nexus between his race and
Supervisor’s feedback.

Regarding claim 5, Supervisor admitted that she did not approve Complainant’s request for
credit hours. She explained, however, that she did so because she has a practice of not approving
credit hours for anyone.
                                                 8                                     2020005181

As the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, Complainant
now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency’s stated reasons were merely a pretext for
discrimination. Complainant makes no argument as to why the Agency’s reasons were
pretextual, as he does not submit a rebuttal or any appellate arguments. He does state in his
Declaration, as to claim 1, that none of the other employees were moved. However, the record
reflects that Co-Worker 1 was also moved. Regarding claim 4, he attested that Supervisor
erroneously gave him midterm feedback that actually pertained to Co-Worker 1. However,
Complainant provided no evidence to support this. His unsupported assertions do not establish
that the stated reasons for moving him or for his mid-term feedback, respectively, were pretexts
for discrimination.

In sum, Complainant has not shown that the Agency's reasons are unworthy of credence or that
discriminatory motivation more likely motivated the Agency's actions. As a result, we find that
there was no discrimination.

Harassment (Claims 2 and 6)

To the extent that Complainant is alleging that he was subjected to a hostile work environment in
claims 1, 3, 4, and 5, the Commission finds that under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift
Systems. Inc., 510 U.S. 17 (1993), Complainant's claim of hostile work environment must fail.
See Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Mar.
3, 1994). Complainant's harassment claim is precluded based on the Commission's finding that
he failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by
discriminatory animus with regard to the afore-mentioned claims. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01932923 (Sept. 21, 2000).
To establish a claim of hostile work environment, Complainant must show that: (1) he belongs to
a statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal
or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based
on his statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment
and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or
creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for
imputing liability. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). In short, to
prove his harassment claim, Complainant must establish that he was subjected to conduct that
was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's position would
have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct
was taken because of a protected basis. Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements,
hostility and motive, will the question of Agency liability present itself.
We find that Complainant failed to establish that he was subjected to unlawful harassment in
claims 2 and 6. Complainant has not established that the conduct at issue was based on his
protected class. Regarding claim 2, Supervisor gave distinct, performance-based reasons why
she verbally counseled Complainant.
                                                  9                                 2020005181

Regarding claim 6, we find that the nature of the claim focuses on the denial of Complainant’s
Weingarten rights rather than the validity of the proposed reprimand itself. The Commission
does not have jurisdiction over the denial of Weingarten rights. See Simensen v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A21068 (Feb. 26, 2002).

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                                10                                    2020005181

Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service
on the other party, unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in
which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 21, 2022
Date
