              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Anne B., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                           Secretary,
                                     Department of Defense
                                 (Defense Commissary Agency),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021000831

                                 Agency No. DeCA-00009-2019

                                           DECISION

On November 13, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 14, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
REVERSES the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Lead Information
Technology (IT) Specialist, GS-2210-14, for the Agency’s Enterprise Architecture & Engineering
at the Agency’s Headquarters in Fort Lee, Virginia. She had been hired in April 2016 as an
Information Technology Specialist and became her team’s Lead in December 2017. 2


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
 Complainant identified multiple individuals in this complaint, either as responsible management
officials or as witnesses. There was a great deal of interdisciplinary collaboration among the
various branches and teams in the office due to project-centric integration throughout the IT
Directorate. Consequently, at different times, Complainant’s team members and sometimes
Complainant herself would receive work assignments from various individuals on other teams
                                                  2                                   2021000831

On January 10, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her and subjected her to a hostile work environment on the bases of race (African-
American) and sex (female) when: 3

          1. Complainant was hired in 2016, staff and managers assumed she was related to other
             African-American employees in the office;



designated as project or team leads. Information on the race, sex, and Complainant’s relationships
with those witnesses is specified where necessary for an understanding of the factual circumstances
of the case. The individuals Complainant identified include:

      •   The Chief Technology Officer, a Supervisory Information Technology (IT) Specialist
          (Asian/Hispanic female) (SITS1).
      •   A second Supervisory IT Specialist who served as Complainant’s second-line supervisor
          between December 2017 and August 2018 (Black male) (SITS2).
      •   A Supervisory IT Specialist who directly supervised Complainant temporarily from Oct.
          to Dec. 2017 (TS1)
      •   An IT Program Manager Supervisor who served as Complainant’s second-line supervisor
          between October and December 3017 (White male) (ITPMS1).
      •   The IT Oversight & Management Chief – Complainant’s first-line supervisor since
          December 2017 (Black male) (S1).
      •   The Deputy Director, who served as Complainant’s second-line supervisor between
          December 2017 and her third-line supervisor since August 2018 (S3).
      •   An IT Program Manager (ITPM1).
      •   An IT specialist under Complainant’s supervision (ITS1).
      •   The Network Chief (NC).
      •   The Data Center Chief (Black male) (DCC).
      •   A second IT Program Management Supervisor (White male) (ITPMS2).
      •   A second IT specialist working under Complainant (Black male) (ITS2).
      •   A Business Financial Manager (White female) (BFM1).
      •   A second Business Financial Manager (White female) (BFM2).
      •   A third Information Technology Specialist (White male) (ITS3).
      •   A Contracting Officer Representative (White female) (COR).
      •   The Sustainment Branch Chief in the IT Directorate (SBC).
      •   A third Supervisory IT Specialist who directly supervised Complainant between April 2016
          an October 2017 (Black female) (SITS3).
      •   The Program Manager for IT Infrastructure (Black male) (ITPM2).
      •   The Division Chief for Resales and Outside Continental United States (White male) (DC).
      •   The Customer Services Support Chief (Black male) (CSSC).
      •   A Lead Contracting Specialist (Black female) (LCS).
3
    The claims have been re-ordered in chronological order for clarity.
                                        3                                    2021000831

2. In May 2016, BFM1 accused Complainant of disappearing and not completing her job
   tasks;

3. In June 2016, BFM1 told Complainant a story about her daughter playing outside and
   noticing children who were “burnt” and how she, BFM1, had to explain to her daughter
   that the children were African-American;

4. From October 2016 to July 2017, Complainant was asked to re-compete a contract as
   a sole-source acquisition that she believed was in violation of procurement procedures,
   which resulted in her being labeled as difficult and rude;

5. In June 2017, Complainant received a lower rating on a succession management
   assessment from SITS2;

6. In September 2017, ITPMS1 asked Complainant to set up a meeting with an outside
   party but once the meeting was scheduled, ITPMS1 cancelled it;

7. From October through December 2017, Complainant was assigned to a half-cubicle
   away from her team members;

8. From October through December 2017, TS1 failed to answer Complainant’s emails in
   a timely manner;

9. From October through December 2017, ITPMS1 required Complainant to provide
   weekly reports on her accomplishments even though other employees were not required
   to do the same;

10. From October through December 2017, ITPMS2, in his capacity as project manager
    for the Central Meat Processing Plant Contract, did not include Complainant on
    important emails and messages;

11. From October through December 2017, Complainant was not issued a performance
    plan or a close out rating;

12. From October through December 2017, ITPMS2 delayed sending Complainant a copy
    of the Central Meat Processing Plant solicitation package;

13. In December 2017, ITS3 publicly stated that he would only get a promotion if he
    painted himself with a black sharpie while rumors were circulating that Complainant
    became a Team Lead as a result of affirmative action;

14. Since December 2017, ITPM1 did not alert Complainant to important assignments and
    did not provide her with the information she needed to complete her job duties;
                                               4                                   2021000831

       15. Throughout 2018, Complainant had been ostracized and excluded from important
           meetings related to her tasks, with management often circumventing her and contacting
           her subordinates directly;

       16. In January 2018, BFM2, a GS-12, demanded that Complainant brief the Contracting
           Officer Representatives on her previous contracts;

       17. In February 2018, SITS2 assigned ITPM1 a project relating to enterprise architecture
           even though those duties fell within complainant’s position description;

       18. In March 2018, ITPMS2 falsely asserted that ITS2 worked for him even though ITS2
           actually worked under Complainant;

       19. In April 2018, SITS1 and ITPMS1 created charts and assigned Complainant’s staff to
           portfolios without seeking Complainant’s input;

       20. In May 2018, ITPMS1 met with ITPM1 to discuss creating a Business Enterprise
           Architecture, the duties for which fell within Complainant’s position description;

       21. In May 2018, DCC refused to work with Complainant on routine assignments;

       22. In August 2018, NC asked ITS1 to appear at a meeting relating to a task that
           Complainant was assigned to work on without inviting Complainant to the meeting;

       23. Since August 2018, ITPMS1 routinely attempted to assign ITS1 to the Enterprise
           Business Solutions team without Complainant’s knowledge;

       24. In September 2018, ITPM1 asked for information from Complainant’s staff without
           consulting Complainant;

       25. On September 8, 2019, S3 suspended Complainant for two days upon the
           recommendation of SITS2; and

       26. In October 2018, SITS1 berated Complainant about “pointing fingers” and insinuated
           that Complainant had refused to work on an assigned project.

                                 FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Incident (1): Complainant averred that when she was hired in April 2016, staff and management
assumed that she got the job because she was related to one of the other African-American
employees in the office. IR 530-31. COR and BFM2 averred that they thought that Complainant
knew or was otherwise friends with someone who was already there. SITS2 also averred that he
thought Complainant had gotten the job because of her friendship with SITS3. IR 593, 611, 697.
SITS3, however, averred that SITS2 and others questioned her relationship to Complainant, noting
                                                 5                                      2021000831

that some people thought Complainant was her sister. SITS3 also stated that SITS2 once told her
that she had too many African-Americans on her team, and that the situation became such that she
had to call a team meeting to tell the people under her that Complainant was referred to her by the
recruiting team in Human Resources. IR 724.

Incident (2): Complainant claimed that SITS1, her supervisor at the time, told her that she had
received an email from BFM1 that Complainant was taking an hour-long lunch at a nearby
Starbucks. Complainant stated that she mistakenly thought that she could take an hour-long lunch
break if she skipped her two 15-minute breaks. She also stated that she stopped doing so as soon
as she learned of the prohibition. Third, she averred that SITS1 did not treat her White counterparts
in the same manner. IR 530.

Incident (3): Complainant averred that BFM1 told her a story about having to explain to her young
daughter that children who she said were “burnt” were African-American children. She further
averred that BFM1 told SITS1 the same thing. IR 529. SITS3 asserted that BFM1 had the same
conversation with her and that she considered it “very inappropriate.” IR 727-28.

Incident (4): Complainant alleged that SITS2 and others had asked her to re-compete a contract as
a sole source acquisition in violation of the Agency’s standard procurement procedures. She
further averred that when SITS2 asked her to provide a briefing on the matter, she recommended
that those who wanted the contract re-competed should talk to the Agency’s counsel. Complainant
maintained that once she refused to move forward with the requested task, she was labeled by her
colleagues as rude and difficult to work with because she raised a valid objection. She stated that
during a meeting, the SBC said things to her that were berating and nasty, and that the COR had
called out the SBC, saying that his remarks were uncalled for. IR 527. COR averred that SBC
said “something he should not have,” but did not think it was related to Complainant’s race or sex.
IR 592-93. SBC denied any knowledge of the incident and that he ever characterized Complainant
as rude or difficult to work with. IR 597-98. SITS2 also denied having knowledge of the matter
but commended Complainant for her actions. IR 610. SITS3 stated that Complainant’s allegation
was true, and that SITS1 and SITS2 also labeled her as rude and difficult to work with. In
particular, SITS3 averred that they (SITS1, SITS2 and others in management) “have no respect for
African-American women.” IR 727.

Incident (5): Complainant claimed that SITS2 had given her a low rating on a succession
management assessment. IR 528-29. SITS2 responded that he did not remember most of the
details but did recall that the assessment was not the annual performance assessment. Rather,
employees completed voluntary self-assessments that were reviewed by management. He stated
that he “probably had a good reason” to give her a lower rating but denied that it was related to
her race or sex. IR 611. SITS3 averred that she was supposed to rate Complainant as her first-
line supervisor at the time and that SITS2 was supposed to rate her as her second-line supervisor.
SITS3 averred that SITS2 had given Complainant a lower rating without paying attention to
Complainant’s resume, and that he never discussed how she, SITS3, had rated Complainant. IR
727.
                                                6                                     2021000831

Incident (6): Complainant claimed that ITPMS1 called her and S1 into his office and asked her to
set up a meeting, and that once the meeting had been arranged, informed her that it was not
necessary. IR 528. ITPMS1 averred that he could not recall the incident. IR 715. S1 stated that
Complainant had told her about the incident and that similar incidents had happened before. He
averred that he or Complainant would work very hard to set things up, make the necessary contacts,
gather data, task people with assignments, and then ITPMS1 would cancel the meeting without
justification. S1 stated that he was left with the impression that he and Complainant were just
being assigned “busy work.” IR 604.

Incident (7): Complainant alleged that, pursuant to a reorganization initiated by SITS1 and carried
on by ITPMS1, she was assigned to a half-sized cubicle away from her team members while
contractors were assigned to cubicles nearer to her team. IR 521. ITPM2 stated he and
Complainant were moved from their original locations when they were both CORs, but that he
only had to move 50 feet from his old work area whereas Complainant had to move from one end
of the building to the other. ITPM2 also averred that he did not think the action was taken because
Complainant was black; rather, he averred that it was due to availability of space. IR 704. ITPMS1
stated that he did not know anything about the incident but maintained that CORs needed to be
close to the project managers they were supporting. He also averred that he never heard any
concerns voiced about Complainant’s seating assignment. IR 712-13.

Incident (8): Complainant claimed that while she was under TS1’s supervision, he failed to answer
her emails in a timely manner. She averred that he would not respond to some of her emails, and
that she would send him delivery receipts. IR 522. She maintained that her white male and female
counterparts were not treated the same as her. IR 523. According to the EEO investigator, TS1
no longer worked for the Agency and did not provide any contact information. IR 1027.

Incident (9): Complainant claimed that ITPMS1 required her to prepare weekly reports on her
accomplishments, and that the rest of her team, which consisted of white females, did not. IR 523.
ITPMS1 stated that a status report was a normal part of working in his division and in the Agency
as well. He further stated that in order to meet Agency requirements, he required the GS-14
supervisors that directly reported to him, of which Complainant was one, to provide a weekly
status report. IR 713.

Incident (10): Complainant alleged that ITPMS2 was changing deliverables and failing to copy
her on important emails and messages pertaining to vendors, planning, and deliverables. She
maintained that there were actions she was unable to complete and pertinent information she did
not have because ITPMS2 did not include her. IR 524-25. ITPMS2 responded that Complainant
was included in meetings and was involved in helping refine the Central Meat Processing Plant
contract but did not always attend meetings due to telework or being out of the office. ITPMS2
further claimed that he tried to include Complainant in the source selection process but was met
with resistance from his superiors. IR 551-52, 586-87.
                                                 7                                     2021000831

The DC averred that when checking random emails from December 6, 2017, he noticed that both
he and Complainant were not copied on ITPMS2’s response to an inquiry which included them,
but attributed this to communications in IT being “disjointed,” rather than to any desire to exclude
Complainant or to considerations of race or sex. IR 707. LCS affirmed that ITPMS2 gave the
responsibilities for reviewing and approving invoices to someone who was not a COR, as
Complainant was at the time, and that handling invoices was a task typically handled by a COR.
As to race and sex being factors, LCS averred that in general, ITPMS2 had an issue working with
a young black woman who challenged or questioned him. IR 739.

Incident (11): Complainant alleged that she was issued neither a performance plan nor a close-out
rating. IR 524. When asked what evidence she had to prove that her race or sex were factors in
the incident, Complainant did not provide an answer. IR 524. ITPMS1 stated that TS1 was her
supervisor at the time. IR 713. SITS3 averred that Complainant was issued a close-out rating but
not an opening rating, and that ITPMS1 should have initiated the opening rating, but never did.
She further averred that ITPMS1 had non-supervisory GS-14s doing the personnel work that he
should have been doing, and that she believed it was due to race because a White member of
Complainant’s team got her rating. IR 726.

Incident (12): Complainant claimed that ITPMS2 delayed sending her a copy of the Central Meat
Processing Plant solicitation package, and in so doing, waited until she had gone for the day.
Complainant further averred that a Contracting Officer told ITPMS2 that he did not review the
documentation and that she, Complainant, needed to do so and to provide feedback as necessary.
She also stated that she provided feedback the next day but that ITPMS2 continued to push back
on the feedback she tried to give. IR 525-26. SITS2 affirmed that he kept telling ITPMS2 that he
needed to get his acquisition documents reviewed, and that there were tensions between ITPMS1’s
group, of which ITPMS2 was a part, and S1’s group, of which Complainant was a part. SITS2
also stated that there could have been considerations of race and sex at play but could not say for
sure. In SITS2’s words, it was more like, “the Hatfields and the McCoys” between ITPMS1’s
team and S1’s team. IR 610. SITS3, however, averred that it was common for managers to wait
until Complainant was not in the office to take action on something, and that this was based on
Complainant’s race and sex. In addition, she noted that SITS2 wanted ITPM1 in the Lead job that
Complainant held and was disappointed when Complainant got the job. IR 727.

Incident (13): According to Complainant, ITS3 stated that he would only get a promotion if he
painted himself with a black sharpie. Complainant averred that she was shocked and
uncomfortable at the insinuation that she received her promotion to GS-14 based on her skin color
rather than on the bases of merit or credentials. She further claimed that there had been rumors
circulating around the office that Complainant did not deserve to be a GS-14 team lead, and that
her getting that position was the result of affirmative action. Further, she stated that at a vendor
event, SITS2, himself a Black male, advised her to be firmer with her peers because they did not
believe she deserved her promotion. Complainant stated that SITS2 admitted that he also felt the
same way about her. IR 520. SITS2 did admit that he was a little skeptical when he found out
that Complainant had been selected for the Team Lead position but that his attitude changed when
he saw that she could actually do the job. IR 609-10.
                                                8                                     2021000831

Although ITS3 denied having knowledge of the incident, COR, a White female, confirmed that
she heard ITS3 make the comment and that she believed that Complainant’s race and sex were
factors in the incident. IR 591-92. S1 stated that there was an attitude among some in the office
that longevity should determine who gets promoted, that SITS2 had recommended ITPM1, that
the “good old boys” network was upset when Complainant was selected for the Lead over ITPM1,
and that some of them refused to support Complainant in her role as a leader. IR 603-04. SITS3
identified the incident as yet another example of Complainant being harassed because of her race
and sex. IR 723-24.

Incident (14): Complainant claimed that since she became Team Lead in December 2017, ITPM1
would bypass her for actions or tasks and failed to report projects that SITS2 and ITPMS1 had
assigned him to work on. She stated that when she found out about those projects, she could not
immediately provide information on those projects due to ITPM1 not reporting them or noting
them in his weekly status reports. IR 519. When asked why she believed that her race and sex
were factors in this incident, Complainant replied that ITPM1 did not do this with her predecessor
in the Lead position, a White male. IR 520. ITPM1 averred that this allegation was “completely
false,” and that he provided Complainant with a spreadsheet which showed her what everyone
under her was working on. IR 620. SITS2 acknowledged the existence of tensions between
ITPM1 and Complainant because they both applied for the Lead position and ITPM1 did not get
it. He opined that the hard feelings were due to ITPM1’s nonselection rather than Complainant’s
race and sex. IR 609.

Incident (15): Complainant claimed that she was never sure of who held the meetings for the
charters or how the charters were created, but that multiple meetings had taken place. She stated
that she did not know the tasks that ITPM1 was working on that had been assigned by ITPMS1,
and that as of the date of her affidavit, this was still the situation. IR 519.

SITS1 averred that Complainant was not under her at the time and noted that any work products
that go outside of the division are ultimately vetted and approved by S3. IR 543. ITPMS2 denied
that this allegation was true and averred that Complainant’s staff came to him for guidance because
Complainant teleworked a lot and was not always easy to reach. He also stated that sometimes he
and others had to go to Complainant’s staff in order to reach her. IR 550. SITS2 averred that
Complainant was a team lead, not a supervisor, and that it would be normal for her people to
receive tasks from the different teams they were assigned to and for them to report their
assignments to their team lead during weekly staff meetings. IR 608. ITPM1 affirmed that within
the IT Directorate there were a lot of integrated process teams on which individuals on the
Architecture and Engineering team were assigned and that this process of having subject matter
experts from different areas of the IT Directorate had been long standing. ITPM1 reiterated that
he never tried to circumvent Complainant and always tried to make sure that Complainant had the
necessary information. IR 618-19. However, several other witnesses have said otherwise. ITS1,
who as previously noted worked under Complainant, said that people from other teams came to
him all the time, and that Complainant eventually instructed him to refer those individuals to her.
ITS1 could not say for sure whether this was due to considerations of race or sex. IR 702.
                                                9                                     2021000831

S1 averred that he had witnessed Complainant being bypassed and that he had been “unfortunate
enough to experience the same thing.” IR 603. SITS3 averred that ever since Complainant had
been selected for the GS-14 team lead position, management had treated her as if she did not know
what she was talking about. She further averred that once she was promoted to GS-14, her peers
and leadership (meaning ITPMS1 and SITS1) would go to ITPM1, who had previously acted in
Complainant’s position. In addition, she stated that whenever the other team leaders needed her
people, they would go right to her subordinates without going to her first. SITS3 opined that this
was due to Complainant’s race and sex, pointing out that this was never done when her White male
predecessor held her position. IR 725-26. The CSSC also averred that Complainant had been
excluded from important meetings and bypassed whenever members of her staff were needed,
which made it difficult for Complainant to report what her team members were working on and
caused her team members to lose confidence in her. IR 732-33.

Incident (16): Complainant claimed that after she was promoted to GS-14 and had moved to a
different team, BFM2 had demanded her to brief the CORs on her previous contracts. She further
averred that she attempted to transfer her work prior to assuming the Team Lead position, but that
no one was assigned her contracts. She maintained that she spoke to the team before she left on
December 10, 2017, in order to make sure that the contract spreadsheet was updated, and that the
briefing was requested on January 20, 2018. When asked why she believed that her race and sex
were factors in this incident, Complainant replied that she was not given the level of respect due
to her as a more senior employee, and that her white male or female counterparts were not treated
the same way. IR 518.

BMF2 responded that she never demanded that Complainant provide a briefing but that she did
ask Complainant if she would provide specific information regarding three mobile contacts that
the team did not have. She also averred that there was a special form that had to be filled out and
that Complainant did not do so, and that Complainant never responded to follow-up emails. IR
696. S1 asserted that the people in ITPSM1’s division did not really support his team at all, and
that they had been depriving him of information as well as Complainant. S1 also stated that at one
time, the CORs used to be in his division, and that senior management had taken the COR mission
away from him and SITS1 and moved it to ITPMS1’s division, and that as a result, there was no
objective oversight of contracting and acquisitions. IR 602-03.

Incident (17): Complainant asserted that SITS2 assigned ITPMS1 a project relating to enterprise
architecture even though those duties were covered by her position description. She pointed out
that ITPMS1 was a systems engineer while she was an enterprise architect, and that SIST2 assigned
ITPMS1 an enterprise architecture task even though enterprise architecture duties clearly fell
within her position description. Complainant further affirmed that ITPMS1 did not tell her or
report this assignment within his weekly reports and said that he wasn’t even aware of this project
even through he was working on it. Complainant stated that she only found out about the project
when SITS2 asked S1 for a status report about a month after it was assigned. When asked why
she thought her race and sex were factors, Complainant reiterated that her predecessor was a White
male who was not treated in a like manner. IR 517.
                                                  10                                     2021000831

SITS2 averred that he could not recall the incident but that he might have done that since both
Complainant and ITPMS1 both worked in his, SITS2’s directorate. SITS2 also questioned why
he would have to ask Complainant to assign something to someone on her team. IR 608.

Incident (18): Complainant alleged that ITPMS2 falsely asserted that ITS2 worked for him rather
than for her. She averred that ITS2 is the assigned engineer for the Central Meat Processing Plant
contract. LCS asked ITS2 for a status report and ITPMS2 sent an email to the LCR asking her not
to communicate with ITS2 or otherwise reach out to ITS2 or any other team member. She further
averred that ITPMS2 was the Central Meat Processing Plant contract manager but not ITS2’s
supervisor or team lead. Additionally, she averred that ITPMS2 was acting as if her team was
holding things up. IR 516. ITPMS2 responded that he was in a supervisory position and therefore
fully aware of who worked for him and who did not. He also stated that ITS2 was a systems
engineer and therefore not supervised by his division, Program Management. IR 549. LCS averred
that ITS2 was asked to review a contract modification upon his return to work following leave,
and that her conversation with ITPMS2 “definitely implied” that she, LCS, had to go through
ITPMS2 to talk with ITS2. As to whether she believed that race and sex were actors, LCS stated
that it was her general feeling that ITPMS2 had issues with younger women and that she would
not be surprised if race was also a factor. IR 738.

Incident (19): Complainant claimed that in April 2018, SITS1 and ITPMS1 created charters and
assigned Complainant’s staff to project portfolios without first seeking her input. She maintained
that it was her responsibility to assign engineers to different projects throughout the IT Directorate.
She also averred that she and S1 were excluded from the multiple meetings that took place on the
various projects. IR 515.

SITS1 asserted that at a management retreat, an integrated project team on which all divisions
would participate was suggested. SITS1 also averred that since Complainant was the subordinate
to a division head, they did not have to check with her when making assignments to the various
projects. IR 542. ITPMS1 averred that charters were a routine way of providing integrated
structure to the integrated project teams, and that he and SITS1 established the charters as a means
to guide their teams. He also stated that he would welcome Complainant’s participation as well
as her staff’s participation. IR 711-12.

When asked why she believed her race and sex were factors in the way she was treated in
connection with this incident, Complainant replied that her white counterparts were normally
consulted prior to personnel assignments. IR 511, 515. S1 averred that it seemed like ITPMS1
and ITPMS2 were given carte blanche to take people from Complainant’s team and give them
assignments without first getting input from Complainant or himself. He opined that this was due
to the fact that she was an African American female and that ITPMS1 and ITPMS2 did not respect
her. He reiterated that he had discussions with ITPM1, ITPMS1, and SITS1 about the situation
but that nothing was ever done about it. IR 602. The CSSC averred that ITPMS1 assigned
Complainant a contract that was “owned” by SITS1, that SITS1 disagreed with the way the
contract in question was handled, and that SITS1 verbally berated Complainant openly in a manner
that he, CSSC, considered unprofessional. IR 732.
                                                11                                     2021000831

Incident (20): Complainant claimed that in May 2018, ITPMS1 met with ITPM1 to discuss
creating a Business Enterprise Architecture, and that this was another duty that fell within her
position description. She maintained that ITPMS1 was “backdooring” her projects and her staff
without coming to her as the team lead, or her team supervisor, S1. IR 514. ITPM1 confirmed
that he had been tasked to lead the Enterprise Business Architecture project because of his
knowledge and understanding of the Enterprise Business Program. He averred that Complainant
reviewed the documentation and provided comments which he incorporated into the final draft.
IR 617-18. ITPMS1 stated that he did not recall meeting with ITPM1 for the purpose of creating
a business enterprise architecture, but that providing assistance on such a matter would be a normal
part of his workload. IR 711. S1 averred that he witnessed the incident and reiterated his belief
that Complainant was not treated with the respect to be accorded someone in her position because
of her race and sex. IR 602.

Incident (21): Complainant alleged that in May 2018, the DCC refused to work with Complainant
on routine assignments and that she had never seen him behave this way with other senior
employees. IR 513. The DCC averred that Complainant’s section was given an assignment that
they were trying to pass on to him, and that he tried to explain that completing the documentation
for that assignment was “above his pay grade.” He also averred that the issue was between S1 and
SITS1 over who is entitled to assign work to him, the DCC. IR 734. CSSC averred that DCC
worked under him, and that Complainant’s team members came to him requesting calls from the
data center which should have come from the DCC. When he asked Complainant about the matter,
Complainant showed him several emails to the DCC requesting data which were not responded to.
He also averred that on a number of occasions, he had observed DCC, a GS-13, not being respectful
of Complainant’s position as a GS-14. CSSC stated that he personally directed DCC to support
Complainant. IR 732.

Incident (22): Complainant asserted that in August 2018, NC had asked ITS1 to appear at a
meeting concerning a task that Complainant was assigned to work on but did not invite her to that
meeting. She characterized this situation as another example of her peers going around her, and
that ITS1 had told them that they needed to go to her. She reiterated that her race and sex were
factors because they did not bypass her White male predecessor or her White counterparts. IR
512. NC averred that he had talked to ITS1 about the matter because Complainant was not
available at the time. IR 718. ITS1 affirmed that he accepted NC’s invitation to attend the meeting,
and that he informed Complainant about the meeting and found out that she had not been invited.
He averred that he believed that Complainant’s race was a reason for her not being invited. IR
701-02.

Incident (23): Complainant claimed that since August 2018, ITPMS1 had routinely attempted to
assign ITS1 to the Enterprise Business Solution project without her knowledge. She averred that
ITPMS1 assigned ITS1 to a position that was not appropriate for him and that she had a systems
engineer in mind who she believed was a more appropriate choice. She also averred that ITPMS1
later let her know that he wanted ITS2 on the project as well. IR 510-11. ITS1 confirmed that this
was correct.
                                                12                                    2021000831

He further averred that at SITS2’s and ITPMS1’s suggestion, he volunteered to work on the
process improvement project, but once he signed up, he was told that he was going to be a systems
engineer for the Enterprise Business Solutions project. He stated that he told SITS2 that he did
not sign up for that, and that when he informed Complainant, she took him off that project and
assigned a systems engineer to the project. IR 701. ITPMS1 averred that he had to rely on
Complainant’s staff for systems engineering and matrix support, and that Complainant’s
predecessor had assigned ITPM1 as the systems engineer. ITPMS1 confirmed that he was
assigned to lead a process improvement team and that ITS1 had volunteered for that team but had
ceased to participate after attending a few meetings. IR 710-11.

S1 averred that he had once again witnessed ITPMS1 assigning Complainant’s team members
work without getting any input from her or him, S1. He stated that Complainant had indicated to
him that she felt harassed, and that when he tried to discuss with ITPM1, ITPMS1, and SITS1 how
they were constantly usurping Complainant’s authority, they ignored him and continued to not
only usurp Complainant’s authority, but his own as well. He opined that Complainant’s race and
sex were factors in the incident. IR 602.

Incident (24): Complainant claimed that in September 2018, ITPM1 asked for information from
Complainant’s staff without consulting her first, and that he did so in order to circumvent her. IR
509-10. ITPM1 denied having knowledge of the incident. He stated that he transitioned out of
Complainant’s group in September 2018 and did not take over any programs until October 2018.
He averred that he did not find any email correspondence with anyone in Complainant’s group for
the project he was eventually assigned to work on. ITPM1 reiterated that if Complainant had asked
him to coordinate with her in tasking, he would have done so. IR 616. However, ITS1 confirmed
that ITPM1 did approach him after he had left Complainant’s team and asked him about certain
information to which he no longer had access. ITS1 stated that he had to tell ITPM1 that he had
to go through Complainant to get the information he needed. IR 700.

Incident (25): Complainant alleged that on September 8, 2018, she was given a two-day
suspension for making a false official statement. She claimed that SITS3 made the complaint
involving a speeding car that appeared to be coming at her and SITS3. During the ensuing
investigation she was asked to make a statement along with SITS3 and a third witness, that they
all testified to the same thing, and that a few months later they were accused of making a false
statement because the recorded video of the incident did not support their statements. Complainant
averred that she and SITS3 were suspended while the third witness was not, and that SITS2
proposed the suspension. IR 507-09.

SITS2 stated that he recommended the suspension after reviewing the building security video and
finding out that SITS3’s accusation did not square with what he had observed on the video. He
averred that he based his recommendation upon his assessment that if it were not for the video, the
driver SITS3 accused might well have faced criminal charges. IR 606-07.
                                                13                                    2021000831

S3 affirmed that he was the deciding official, that he gave SITS3 a seven-day suspension and
Complainant a two-day suspension, and that Complainant was allowed to serve her suspension on
the two days per week that she had off. He accepted SITS2’s explanation that Complainant and
SITS3 had made false statements. IR 613-14.

SITS3 contested the finding that the video images were not consistent with their statements. She
stated that the third witness who was not suspended had been with the Agency a long time and was
involved in a personal relationship with S3. She also affirmed that SITS2 took advantage of the
fact that S1 was on temporary duty assignment (TDY) at the time of the incident and rushed the
process through. Further, she averred that the video showed that the speeding vehicle was three
feet away rather than ten feet away as SITS2 had determined. SITS3 expressed her belief that the
incident was connected to their race and sex as African-American females. IR 725. S1 averred
that when Complainant told him about the punishment she had received, he thought that a
suspension was very unusual given what had happened. S1 further averred that even though he
was Complainant’s supervisor, he had no input and was not involved in the process at all. He
opined that the decision was taken away from him because he would likely not have recommended
the suspension. IR 601.

Incident (26): Complainant alleged that in October 2018, SITS1 berated both her and S1 and
insinuated that she had refused to work on a particular task. She stated that she had been assigned
a project by SITS2 and that the solution was that SITS1’s team needed to enforce the existing
policy. She further claimed that SITS1 insisted that a new solution was needed and then proceeded
to berate her and S1 for failing to do their jobs. IR 506. SITS1 affirmed that she did not remember
yelling at or berating Complainant. Rather, she merely stated that she would not expect any
deliverables from Complainant or S1 regarding the particular project. She maintained that she
responds to personnel based on their contributions to the Agency’s mission, and that she would
tell employees if they were not contributing. IR 541. S1 stated that during the incident, he and
Complainant were trying to talk to SITS1 in a civil manner but that she was raising her voice and
acting in a very unprofessional manner. IR 600.

At the conclusion of the ensuing investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of
its investigative report (IR) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). On July 12, 2019,
Complainant requested a final decision. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). However, it took the Agency 461
days to do so. 4 The Agency concluded in its decision that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.



4
   Between July 12, 2019, and October 14, 2020, when the decision was finally issued,
Complainant’s counsel had to follow up with the Agency four times to check on the status of the
decision. In an email dated May 22, 2020, the Agency notified Complainant’s counsel that the
employee who drafted final agency decisions was on an extended absence and that it had engaged
a contractor to write the decision.
                                                 14                                     2021000831

This appeal followed. In addition to contesting the Agency’s final decision on the merits,
Complainant also submitted a motion for default judgment. She contends, in essence, that the
Agency severely compromised the integrity of the EEO process by issuing its final decision 461
days late.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Complainant’s Motion for Sanctions

As noted above, Complainant contends on appeal that a default judgment should be entered in her
favor as a sanction against the Agency for issuing an untimely final decision. The Commission’s
regulations provide that an agency shall issue the final decision within 60 days of receiving
notification that a complainant has requested an immediate decision from the agency, or within 60
days of the end of the 30-day period for the complainant to request a hearing or an immediate final
decision where the complainant has not requested either a hearing or a decision. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.110(b). We note that our regulations require agency action in a timely manner at many points
in the EEO process. Tammy S. v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 0120084008 (June 6, 2014).

Compliance with these timeframes is not optional; as the Commission stated in Royal v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009), “the Commission has the
inherent power to protect its administrative process from abuse by either party and must ensure
that agencies, as well as complainants, abide by its regulations.” Because of the length of time it
can take to process a federal sector EEO complaint, any delays in complying with the time frames
in the regulations can impact the outcome of the complainant’s claims. Id.

With respect to Complainant’s request that the Commission sanction the Agency because of the
length of time that it took to issue a final decision in this case, we decline. Although the Agency
failed to issue a timely decision as required by regulation, we find that the Agency did not act in a
manner to warrant a sanction. See, e.g., April T. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No.
2021002762 (Aug. 3, 2022) (finding that the Agency’s 446-day delay in issuing the decision did
not justify the imposition of sanctions); Abe K. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141252
(Nov. 4, 2016) (declining to sanction an agency that issued a decision after approximately 326
days); Josefina L. v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0120142023 (July 19, 2016), req. for
recon. den., EEOC Request No. 0520170108 (Feb. 9, 2017) (finding that the Agency’s 571-day
delay in issuing the decision did not warrant sanctions); Jocelyn R. v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal
                                                15                                    2021000831

No. 0120152852 (Mar. 11, 2016) (citing Vunder v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
01A55147 (May 12, 2006) (declining to sanction an agency that issued a final decision after 371
days)).

While we will not impose a sanction in the present case since the delay in issuance of the Agency
decision did not prejudice Complainant or result in an unconscionable delay in justice, we do find
the Agency’s failure to abide by the regulations reflects negatively on the Agency’s support for
the integrity of the EEO process. Beatrice B. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No.
2019001641 (Sept. 17, 2020) (the Commission declined to issue a sanction where following a
supplemental investigation, the Agency delayed in issuing a final decision for over eight months).
As a result, we will notify Federal Sector Programs (FSP), which monitors the federal agencies’
EEO programs, of the Agency’s failure to comply with the regulations regarding the timely
issuance of its final agency decisions.

Hostile Work Environment

We now turn to the merits of the instant complaint. To establish a claim of discriminatory
harassment Complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) she
was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the
protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her statutorily protected classes;
(4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. See
Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further, the incidents must have been
“sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant's] employment and create
an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

Applying the first Henson factor, we find that Complainant is a member of protected classes by
virtue of her race and sex. Applying the second Henson factor, we find that Complainant was
subjected to actions from various colleagues, supervisors, and managers between April 2016 and
October 2018, that were certainly unwelcome from her own, subjective perspective.

Before moving on to our discussion of the remaining Henson harassment factors, we must point
out that the antidiscrimination statutes are not civility codes. Rather, they forbid “only behavior
so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim's employment.” Oncale v.
Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998). Therefore, to prove her harassment claim,
Complainant must establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so
pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's position would have found the conduct to
be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was taken because of her
protected classes. Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements, hostility and motive,
will the question of Agency liability present itself.
                                                16                                     2021000831

Complainant can satisfy the third prong of the Henson test by establishing that the various
individuals named in her complaint based their actions toward her upon unlawful considerations
of her race and sex. To do so, she could show such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies,
incoherencies, or contradictions in the various named officials’ explanations for their actions that
a reasonable fact finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. Opare-Addo v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007), req. for recon. den. EEOC Request
No. 0520080211 (May 30, 2008). Indicators of such discriminatory intent typically include
discriminatory statements or past personal treatment attributable to those responsible for the
personnel action that led to the filing of the complaint, comparative or statistical data revealing
differences in treatment across various protected-group lines, unequal application of Agency
policy, deviations from standard procedures without explanation or justification, or inadequately
explained inconsistencies in the evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12, 2015).

When asked by the EEO investigator why she believed that her race and sex factored into the
various incidents, Complainant maintained that her predecessor and many of her White
counterparts were not excluded from key meetings and assignments and did not have their
leadership questioned or their authority undermined. IR 506, 508-18, 520, 522-23, 525-30. SITS1,
SITS2, ITPM1, ITPMS1, ITPMS2 and ITS3 all denied that they tried to exclude Complainant from
meetings or otherwise tried to undercut her authority over her team. Rather, as ITPM1 explained,
due to the prevalence of ad hoc integrated and interdisciplinary project teams it was common for
project leads to give assignments to people who were nominally assigned to teams other than their
own. IR 618. In addition, ITPMS2 stated that Complainant was often difficult to reach because
she teleworked, and sometimes he had to go through her staff to reach her. IR 550-51, 587.
However, S1, SITS3, CSSC, and COR all expressed their belief that considerations of
Complainant’s race or sex were motivating factors in the various incidents.

S1, SITS3, and CSSC all maintained that ever since Complainant began working for the Agency,
and especially after she had been selected as her team’s Lead in December 2017, she was treated
by her peers essentially as a “persona non grata,” or “someone who did not know what they were
doing” by most of the staff and management in the IT Directorate. IR 602-04, 723-27. 731-33.
Even COR, a White female stated that Complainant was subjected to hostilities in the workplace
because of her race and sex. IR 591-92. The preponderant evidence points to the existence of a
pervasive attitude on the part of many staff and managers in the IT Directorate that Complainant
was not capable of functioning as an effective Team Lead, and that she got her position through
affirmative action rather than merit. That animus was on vivid display when ITS3 commented, in
the presence of COR, that he had to paint himself with a black sharpie in order to get promoted,
and had done so at a time when rumors were circulating around the IT Directorate that Complainant
did not deserve her GS-14 position. IR 592. It was also on display when BFM1 made her
inappropriate comment about African-American children. IR 727-28. In yet another indicator of
discriminatory animus, SITS2 gave Complainant a low rating on leadership potential six months
before she got the Team Lead job and claimed that he could not remember why he gave her that
rating, IR 611, 727.
                                                17                                     2021000831

Under the particular circumstances of this case, we find it more likely than not that ITPM1,
ITPMS1, ITPMS2, SITS1, SITS2 and ITS3 were motivated by unlawful considerations of
Complainant’s race and sex in connection with all 26 incidents comprising her claim, and
consequently, that she satisfied the third element of the Henson test for the existence of a hostile
work environment.

Moving on to the fourth element, we find each incident by itself would not be sufficiently severe
or pervasive to rise to the level of harassment. However, when considered collectively as part of
a pattern that had been going on for two years or longer, these incidents are more than sufficient
to meet that test. For over two years, perhaps longer, Complainant constantly found her
capabilities questioned, her authority undermined, and her participation in the various integrated
projects constrained. IR 510-11, 514-17, 519, 549, 602-03, 608, 700-02, 710-11, 724-27, 732-34,
738. There may well have been a standard operating procedure under which Complainant’s
subordinates who were working on integrated projects received work assignments from individuals
other than her as their Team Lead. But Complainant is alleging more than that. She is alleging
that she was systematically excluded from the loop about what was going on with various projects
in the IT Directorate, and that those exclusions made it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to
prepare and submit the required weekly status reports. She is also alleging that her superiors and
her peers undermined her authority as a team lead. In addition, she was berated by one of her
colleagues for refusing to violate standard procurement procedures by transforming a competitive
contract into a sole-source contract. IR 592-93, 727. She was also suspended, along with SITS3,
herself an African-American, as a result of a rushed investigation involving a questionable
interpretation of a video image. IR 606-07, 613-14, 725. When the incidents are considered
collectively, there is no question that a reasonable person in Complainant’s position would have
found the behavior of ITPM1, SITS1, SITS2, ITPMS1, ITPMS2, and ITS3 toward her to be so
objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of her employment in the IT Directorate.
Consequently, we find that Complainant satisfied the fourth element of the Henson test.

With respect to element (5), an employer is subject to vicarious liability for harassment when it is
created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority over the
employee. See Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998); Faragher v. City of
Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775 (1998). However, where the harassment does not result in a tangible
employment action the agency can raise an affirmative defense, which is subject to proof by a
preponderance       of     the      evidence,      by      demonstrating:         (1)    that     it
exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any harassing behavior; and (2) that
complainant unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities
provided by the agency or to avoid harm otherwise. See Burlington Industries, supra at
765; Faragher, supra at 807; Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful Harassment
by Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002, §V(A) (June 18, 1999). SITS3 averred that
Complainant had reported to her that she was being harassed, and that she, SITS3, tried to talk to
the various individuals named in Complainant’s complaint without success. When asked whether
the Agency took any preventative or corrective action, SITS3 replied that management had not.
IR 724. The Agency has not presented any documentary or testimonial evidence that would cause
us to question SITS3’s truthfulness as a witness.
                                                 18                                     2021000831

Consequently, we find that the Agency’s affirmative defense fails, and ultimately, that
Complainant has satisfied the fifth prong of the Henson test. Accordingly, the Commission finds
that Complainant was subjected to a discriminatory hostile work environment for which the
Agency can be held liable.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we REVERSE the
Agency’s final decision.

                                         ORDER (C0618)

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial action:

   1. Within 90 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
      investigation concerning Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages and
      equitable relief. The Agency shall allow Complainant to present evidence in support of
      her claimed entitlement. See Carle v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369
      (Jan. 5, 1993). Complainant shall cooperate with the Agency in this regard. The Agency
      shall issue a final decision on compensatory damages and equitable relief no later than 90
      calendar days of the date this decision is issued. The Agency shall pay Complainant the
      compensatory damages, and provide her with equitable relief, as determined by the Agency
      within 30 days from the date of the Agency's final decision. The Agency shall submit a
      copy of the final decision to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth herein.

   2. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued the Agency shall provide eight
      hours of in-person or interactive training to the entire staff and management of the IT
      Directorate regarding their responsibilities with respect to eliminating discrimination and
      preventing hostile work environments in the federal workplace.

   3. Within 30 calendar days of the date this decision is issued the Agency shall consider taking
      appropriate disciplinary action against the irresponsible management officials identified in
      the above decision as SITS1, SITS2, ITPM1, ITPMS1, ITPMS2, and ITS3. The
      Commission does not consider training to be disciplinary. The Agency shall report its
      decision to the Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it
      shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, it shall
      set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline. If any of the responsible
      management officials have left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish
      documentation of their departure date(s)

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision." The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of benefits due
Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been implemented.
                                                19                                    2021000831

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post in the offices of the IT Directorate at its Headquarters in Fort Lee,
Virginia, copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's
duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for
60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted
to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the
Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The
report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)),
she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the
complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The
attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30) calendar days of
receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance
with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999).
                                                 20                                     2021000831

If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request.
                                                  21                                      2021000831

Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 8, 2022
Date
