               U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                             Office of Federal Operations
                                    P.O. Box 77960
                               Washington, DC 20013


                                         Davina W., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Kilolo Kijakazi,
                                     Acting Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                             Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022003512

                                  Agency No. NY210414SSA


                                          DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(“EEOC” or “Commission”) from a June 15, 2022 final agency decision (“FAD”) that found the
Agency was in compliance with the terms of the settlement agreement into which the parties
entered. The Commission accepts the appeal. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.402; 29 C.F.R. §
1614.504(b); and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405.

                                       BACKGROUND

Since 2010, Complainant has worked as a Supervisory Contact Representative (“SCR”), GS-12,
for the Agency’s Teleservice Center (“TSC”) in Jamaica, New York. Believing that she was
denied a reasonable accommodation and, since 2018, subjected to a hostile work environment by
her first level supervisor, a TSC Assistant Manager (“Former Supervisor”) 2, Complainant filed a
formal EEO complaint on August 24, 2021.

In her EEO complaint and testimony provided to the EEO Investigator, Complainant stated: “I
have mental and physical disabilities. I have panic attacks, major depressive disorder, anxiety,
breathing issues and stress that is affecting my recovery from recent breast cancer.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
    Complainant reported to Former Supervisor through May 21, 2021.
                                               2                                    2022003512

I have a 12-year old daughter who has asthma an also care for my mother who is being treated
for stage 4 colon rectal cancer. All of my impairments are aggravated by the stress of my
position and my interactions with [Former Supervisor]”(emphasis added).

As a reasonable accommodation, Complainant requested a transfer to a non-managerial GS-12
position with the Disability Processing Branch (“DPB”) as a Disability Processing Specialist
(“DPS”), having previously held the position for six months as part of a leadership program.
Complainant explained that the DPS position would allow her to manage her health conditions
because it lacked the stress triggers of the SCR position. Specifically, it would ensure that
interactions with Former Supervisor would be minimal since “DPS is on the 7th floor and
[Former Supervisor] has no connection with that component.” Also, she would not have to work
additional hours.

On or about May 21, 2021, Complainant was notified that her request for a transfer as a
reasonable accommodation had been denied, in favor of an alternative accommodation, where,
going forward, Complainant would instead report to her second level supervisor, the TSC
Manager. Days later, on May 25, 2021, Complainant initiated her EEO complaint and requested
reconsideration of her accommodation request. According to Complainant, the alternate
accommodation was not effective because “my interaction with [Former Supervisor] is only one
aspect of my current position that aggravates my anxiety, major depression and panic attacks. . .
.Although my interactions with [Former Supervisor] are not as frequent since I began reporting
to [TSC Manager] I believe she is still influencing things that are happening to me.”

In approximately February 2022, while the complaint was awaiting a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (“AJ”) 3 and additional requests for a reasonable accommodation by
Complainant were pending, the parties engaged in settlement negotiations. On April 13, 2022,
Complainant and the Agency entered into a negotiated settlement agreement (“NSA” or
“Agreement”) to resolve the matter. The Agreement provided, in relevant part:

         1(b)   In light of the terms of this settlement agreement, which offers
                Complainant a position that she was otherwise seeking through a
                reasonable accommodation request, Complainant agrees that she will
                withdraw all reasonable accommodation requests currently pending with
                the Agency within three days of the effective date of this settlement
                agreement. This agreement does not prevent Complainant from filing
                reasonable accommodation requests in the future. [Emphasis added.]

         2(b)   Within 14 calendar days of the effective date of this Settlement
                Agreement, the Agency agrees to reassign Complainant to a GS-12, Social
                Insurance Specialist [Systems Coordinator (“Sysco”) position]. Position
                Description No. 5E325, within the Agency's DCO/New York Region
                /Northeastern Program Service Center/Computer Operations Section.…


3
    EEOC Hearing No. 520-2022-00143X.
                                               3                                    2022003512

              The Parties agree that…[the GS-12 Sysco position] has no unusual
              physical demands, although there may be occasional lifting, stooping, and
              moving computer equipment, etc., within offices…However, in
              recognition of Complainant's recent surgery, the Agency agrees that
              Complainant shall not be required to lift anything over 10 pounds for six
              months, beginning on the day Complainant is reassigned to the [the GS-12
              Sysco position]. The Agency makes no assurances nor shall any language
              in this Settlement Agreement be construed as an assurance that the
              Position Description for the [the GS-12 Sysco position] will not be altered
              or rescinded following the effective date of this Settlement.

On May 11, 2022, Complainant notified the Agency, in writing, that it breached the NSA on two
occasions. She asked that the Agency cure the alleged breach(es) by placing her in a Disability
Specialist position within DPB. Specifically, Complainant alleged that on May 9, 2022, only
two weeks after she started in the Sysco position, Former Supervisor was transferred to the 11th
floor, in an office that shared a wall with Complainant’s new workspace. Complainant
explained: “[t]he main reason I filed a complaint was to be removed from . . . [Former
Supervisor’s] toxic manner and egregious behavior.” Complainant also became aware that the
10 pound weight restriction and surgery, referenced in Paragraph 2(b) of the NSA, were
disclosed to a colleague outside her supervisory chain, which she believed was also in violation
of the Agreement. Further, Complainant claimed these actions also created a hostile work
environment.

Complainant again wrote to the Agency, on May 20, 2022, stating: “I cannot be on the same
floor” as Former Supervisor. She explained that the prospect of Former Supervisor’s presence
caused her to “fear for [her] wellbeing.” Complainant reminded the Agency that she still had
caregiver responsibilities and that she was currently “battling severe anxiety and depression.”
She noted that in her new Sysco position, she may have to provide Former Supervisor with
technical support, “on top of having to see [Former Supervisor] in the ladies room on the 11th
floor or having to be near her at the 11th floor elevator.” Complainant also asserted that the
Agency breached the NSA again when it failed to advise her that following the training period,
the Sysco position she accepted under Paragraph 2(b) would require her to work during off
hours, cover for other employees, and take a rotating weekend shift. Once again, Complainant
asked the Agency to cure the alleged breaches by placing her into her preferred position in DBP.

Days later, on May 24, 2022, Complainant informed the Agency: “Today I am in the office. I
have to be in the HSDP 12 room. [Former Supervisor] is here, she comes out of her office and
passes where I am twice; I am very upset, I feel sick… I stated this would happen. I cannot work
like this, my stomach is in knots and I feel trapped.” Complainant contended that since then, she
has “not been able to go into the office due to anxiety and depression since seeing [Former
Supervisor].”

In its June 15, 2022 FAD, the Agency concluded that no breach occurred.
                                                4                                    2022003512

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.504(a) provides that any settlement agreement knowingly
and voluntarily agreed to by the parties, reached at any stage of the complaint process, shall be
binding on both parties. The Commission has held that a settlement agreement constitutes a
contract between the employee and the Agency, to which ordinary rules of contract construction
apply. See Herrington v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Request No. 05960032 (Dec. 9, 1996). The
Commission has further held that it is the intent of the parties as expressed in the contract, not
some unexpressed intention that controls the contract’s construction. Eggleston v. Dep't of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 05900795 (Aug. 23, 1990). In ascertaining the intent of the
parties with regard to the terms of a settlement agreement, the Commission has generally relied
on the plain meaning rule. See Hyon O. v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Request No.
05910787 (Dec. 2, 1991). This rule states that if the writing appears to be plain and unambiguous
on its face, its meaning must be determined from the four corners of the instrument without
resort to extrinsic evidence of any nature. See Montgomery Elevator Co. v. Building Eng'g
Servs. Co., 730 F.2d 377 (5th Cir. 1984); Complainant v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120140143 (Feb. 20, 2014).

Consistent with the plain language in Paragraph 2(b), the Agency timely reassigned Complainant
to the GS-12 Sysco position. It is undisputed that Complainant has not been asked or expected to
lift anything weighing 10 pounds or greater since starting in the position. Additionally, the
parties do not dispute that Complainant reviewed the PD for the Sysco position and had
opportunities to request clarification from the Agency regarding the PD before she entered the
NSA.

Regarding the May 11, 2022 allegation of breach, Complainant has not established the
agreement was violated when her lifting restriction and surgery were disclosed to a colleague
outside of her supervisory chain. The Agency asserts that the colleague was notified because he
was Complainant’s mentor and, as such, could potentially give her assignments. Moreover, the
plain language of the NSA does not limit disclosure of Complainant’s restriction to Management.
Rather. Paragraph 7 of the NSA specifies: “[n]othing in this Settlement Agreement shall prevent
the disclosure of any terms or conditions of this Settlement Agreement…or any other
information necessary to enforce this Settlement Agreement.”

In her May 20, 2022 Breach Notice, Complainant asserted her new schedule and job duties
constituted a breach because “I asked to be placed in a position that was less stress not still
working after my shift or working on the weekends.” However, nothing in the plain language of
the NSA obligates the Agency to ensure that Complainant does not have to work overtime, or
that she is provided specific days off. See Carter v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No.
01985009 (Jul. 2, 1999) citing Jenkins-Nye v. Gen. Serv. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 019851903
(Mar. 4, 1987) (in the absence of writing, an interpretation of an Agreement cannot be enforced).

Further, the record reflects that Complainant entered the NSA with the knowledge that additional
duties or overtime could be asked of her were she to accept the Sysco position in 2(b).
                                               5                                    2022003512

Email conversations between Complainant and Agency Counsel, provided by Complainant,
demonstrate that Complainant communicated her trepidation that the Sysco position would be
just as stress-inducing as her SCR position within TSC. Nevertheless, after confirming that there
was no possibility that the Agency would offer her an alternative non-supervisory GS-12
position (DSP or otherwise) and that Former Supervisor would be in a different office (at the
time on the 4th floor), Complainant opted to enter the NSA. Therefore, we decline to find that
the new schedule or duties violated the Agreement.

We next consider Complainant’s claim that transferring Former Supervisor to an office near
Complainant’s new position constitutes a breach of the Agreement. The parties chose to
explicitly note in Paragraph 1(b) of the NSA that the Sysco position is “a position that
[Complainant] was otherwise seeking through a reasonable accommodation request.”
Additionally, the record reflects that the Agency was aware that Complainant’s request for a
reasonable accommodation entailed minimizing her interactions with Former Supervisor, not
simply removing her from Complainant’s supervisory chain. On February 28, 2022,
Complainant informed Agency Counsel that as an accommodation, in addition to “no heavy
lifting” or telework, she did “not want any contact with [Former Supervisor] (former abuser)”
(emphasis in original). Similarly, in her August 24, 2021 EEO complaint Complainant expressly
linked her anxiety and need for an accommodation to Former Supervisor’s presence, stating that
she “faced bullying/harassment/[a] hostile work environment from [Former Supervisor] over the
years which has caused me to suffer anxiety and mental health problems….I cannot afford to
have a nervous breakdown my family need me; my mental health is important.” She goes on to
explain, in her formal EEO complaint, that she “applied for [other positions within the Agency]
to remove myself from [Former Supervisor’s] presence.” Additionally, Complainant stated that
her reasonable accommodation request(s) were “to be removed from the stresses of management,
especially from [Former Supervisor’s] presence....”

By accepting the Sysco position, as noted in her May 11, 2022 correspondence, Complainant
understood that she would be “removed to a completely new component and floor (11th).”
Complainant acknowledged that she was “cognizant that [she] could possibly see [Former
Supervisor] around the building; however, her being on the 4th floor would make seeing her a
rare encounter.” However, only two weeks after starting her new position, Supervisor was
transferred to the same floor, her office sharing a wall with Complainant.

The Commission has previously found that bad faith in negotiating and implementing a
settlement agreement constitutes a breach. Todd v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No.
05950169 (Jun. 12, 1997), Dupuich v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120073901 (Nov.
2, 2007). A complainant may establish that an agency acted in bad faith during negotiations with
evidence that the agency: (1) was aware of the complainant’s main purpose for entering the
agreement, (2) knew or should have known facts that would undermine that purpose, and (3)
failed to disclose those facts to the complainant before executing the agreement. See, e.g.
Complainant v. Nat’l Endowment for the Arts, EEOC Appeal No. 0120133264 (Feb. 4, 2014).
                                                6                                     2022003512

In Verdell A. v. Department of Homeland Security, the Commission found that the agency
negotiated in bad faith when it laterally transferred a complainant to another office in accordance
with a settlement agreement, then, two and a half months later, notified the complainant that due
to a reorganization, her former supervisors were going to be reassigned to the same office in
supervisory roles. EEOC Appeal No. 0120152922 (Feb. 23, 2016). In that instance, evidence
reflected that “the parties to the negotiation were aware that [the complainant's] only purpose in
entering the Agreement was to leave the chain of command her [former supervisors].” The
Commission concluded that “given the timing and the extent of the organizational changes . . .
the Agency likely knew or should have known at the time of the negotiation that the possibility
existed for [the complainant’s former supervisors] to be transferred to [her] new office.” but see,
Joshua F. v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 0120161062 (Apr. 19, 2016) (no bad
faith found where an agency, in accordance with a settlement agreement, laterally transferred a
complainant to a different position, which was then eliminated due to a reduction in force
because “the record contain[ed] no evidence indicating that the agency was aware that this
circumstance would occur when the parties entered into the Agreement”).

In Verdell A., the Commission also explained that “based on the reasonable intentions of the
parties, we do not interpret two and a half months to be a reasonable amount of time to satisfy
the Agreement.” Emphasis added, see also, Suter v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120093523 (Oct. 19, 2010) (bad faith found when, per a settlement agreement, an agency
placed a complainant into a specific building management position, after failing to disclose that
the building where the position was located was scheduled to close in six months), but see,
Carter v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A60569 (May 25, 2006) (no breach
when, three years after placing Complainant in a modified clerk position as part of a Settlement
Agreement, the district offices decided to eliminate clerk positions).

According to Complainant, the Agency was aware at the time of the NSA negotiations that
Former Supervisor would be transferred to the 11th Floor, as it was a noncompetitive transfer,
and it “was not a promotion… she was removed from her supervisory duties.” Complainant
asserts: “[t]he agency does not see how unhealthy and unsafe this situation is.” We note that the
investigative record reflects that Former Supervisor was aware that Complainant’s reasonable
accommodation requests accused her of harassment and identified such as a reason for the
request. We find the two-week time frame sufficient to infer that the Agency knew, or should
have known, that Former Supervisor would be reassigned to the 11th floor during negotiations.

We find that the Agency’s responses downplaying Former Supervisor’s proximity to
Complainant’s workspace are disingenuous and contradicted by the record. On appeal,
Complainant explains that despite working in “different suites” there are still two doors leading
from her work area to Former Supervisor’s office. When they were in the office at the same
time, states Complainant, Former Supervisor walked past Complainant and stared at her in an
intimidating manner. The Agency claims that Complainant and Former Supervisor are
scheduled to telework four days a week, with different in-office days. Yet it fails to
acknowledge that the telework schedule arose as a precaution against the COVID-19 pandemic,
and that the plain language of the NSA and the PD do not guarantee telework.
                                                 7                                      2022003512

While the Agency also claims that Complainant has held a regular schedule, it does not admit
that this was a temporary training schedule. Similarly, in arguing that Complainant and Former
Supervisor saw each other once, on May 24, 2022, and did not talk to each other, the Agency
disregards Complainant’s expressed fears regarding such an event, and the impact on her
disabilities when it occurred.

The record does not support the Agency’s assertion Complainant did not made it clear, during
negotiations, that her “main reason” for entering the NSA was to get away from Former
Supervisor. On February 16, 2022, during settlement negotiations, Complainant informed
Agency Counsel, that due to stress from working in TSC, she survived a suicide attempt, and has
since been undergoing outpatient psychiatric treatment and increased medication. She explained,
“I’m being extremely cautious with accepting positions for my mental stability and ongoing
medical issues.” On March 9, 2022, Agency Counsel assured Complainant that Former
Supervisor “will no longer be in the same office as you nor will she be anywhere in your
management chain, so any contact would probably be limited to maybe seeing her in the building
sometimes.” On March 24, 2022, Complainant followed up, indicating that she was eager to
transfer, stating, “[s]orry if I’m a bit inpatient but we will be going into the office next week and
I am on the same floor as [Former Supervisor]. I do not want to be in the office with her each
day; Supervisors and Managers have to be in the office every day for the next week.”
Particularly in light of Complainant’s very specific and shared concerns, over proximity to
Former Supervisor, the Agency’s failure to disclose the impeding transfer of Former Supervisor
to the 11th floor during negotiations evinces bad faith.

Subsequent Actions of Alleged Discrimination

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.504(c), allegations that subsequent acts of discrimination violate a
settlement agreement shall be processed as separate complaints. "Subsequent acts of
discrimination" include incidents that are not expressly addressed within the settlement
agreement, or allegations of retaliation for EEO activity related to or arising from the settlement
agreement. See Shanice C. v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120152764 (Feb.
16, 2017). In such cases, rather than raise a breach allegation, the complainant should contact an
EEO Counselor in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105.

Throughout her appeal and in her correspondence alleging breach, Complainant asserts that she
has been subjected to a hostile work environment and retaliation since entering the NSA. For
instance, she alleges: “I have to deal with my fellow co-workers being told I’m ‘Upset’ and
‘Disgruntled’ to now seeing [Former Supervisor] all over again…I have been completely
disgraced, violated, and blackballed.” The Agency correctly identified these allegations as
subsequent acts of discrimination, and properly directed Complainant to report any new
allegations of discrimination to an EEO Counselor. As these allegations do not concern a breach
of the NSA they cannot be adjudicated in this decision.

Further, we note that the May 11, 2022 allegation of breach also alleges that confidential medical
information pertaining to her FMLA, breast cancer surgery, and the 10 pound lifting restriction
was improperly disclosed to her mentor and other unspecified employees.
                                                 8                                      2022003512

See, e.g. Melanie F. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120142156 (Jun. 23, 2016)
(failure to protect confidential medical records constitutes a per se violation of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973) citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.14(c)(1) (“Information obtained . . . regarding the medical
condition or history of any employee shall . . . be treated as a confidential medical record”). This
new, subsequent action must be processed as a separate matter. If Complainant wishes to pursue
the issue through the EEO process, she must raise the matter with an EEO Counselor.

Similarly, while Complainant’s May 20, 2022 assertion that her post-training schedule for the
new Sysco position will exacerbate the symptoms of her disabilities does not constitute a breach
of the agreement, the Agency should consider this to be a request for a reasonable
accommodation. The Agency is reminded that an employee is not required to use the “magic”
words “reasonable accommodation” when making a request. See Robinson-Brooks v. United
States Postal Serv., Appeal No. 0120120732 (Oct. 25, 2012); see also, e.g. Angus W. v. United
States Postal Serv., EEOC No. 0120160826 (Mar. 23, 2016) (complainant’s request for an earlier
start time and for others to assist when she was the only one assigned work requiring a repetitive
motion that exacerbated an injury was a request for a reasonable accommodation). She has
identified possible job modifications to accommodate her disabilities: “I just want to be able to
do my work during my shift (NOT during off hours) and go home to my ill parent and deal with
my own medical problems…I [would] sit in a cubicle or home do my work log off, after
completing my shift, and go home to worry about my personal life. I am battling severe anxiety
and depression…” [emphasis added].

                                          CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s finding that no breach occurred is REVERSED. We find that the
Agency acted in bad faith, regarding Paragraphs 1(b) and 2(b), but only to the extent that
Complainant was not removed from Former Supervisor’s presence.

The matter is hereby REMANDED for further processing in accordance with this Decision and
the following Order.

                                              ORDER

  I.   Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency is
       ORDERED to notify Complainant that she has fifteen (15) calendar days from the date
       of her receipt of the Agency's notice within which to notify the Agency that:

           a. She wishes to return to the status quo prior to the signing of the agreement by
              returning any benefits already received under the agreement and reinstate her
              underlying EEO complaint for continued processing; or

           b. She wishes to keep the settlement agreement in effect, deleting provisions 1(b)
              and 2(a), while allowing the remainder of the agreement to stand.
                                                9                                     2022003512

 II.   If Complainant elects the reinstatement of her underlying complaint and she returns any
       monies or benefits owing to the Agency (e.g. payment for sick leave), the Agency
       promptly resume processing of the complaint from the point processing ceased pursuant
       to the provisions of 29 C.F.R. Part 1614.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Compliance with the Commission’s corrective action is mandatory. The Agency shall submit its
compliance report within thirty (30) calendar days of the completion of all ordered corrective
action. The report shall be in the digital format required by the Commission, and submitted via
the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s report
must contain supporting documentation, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to
the Complainant. If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant
may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The
Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s
order prior to or following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the
right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below
entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for
enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42
U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be
terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision.
                                                 10                                     2022003512

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title.
                                               11                                    2022003512

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will
terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 19, 2022
Date
