              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                            Elise S., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                     Denis R. McDonough,
                                           Secretary,
                                 Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2022000226

                                     Appeal No. 2020002255

                              Agency No. 200H-0646-2017104850

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020002255 (September 16, 2021).
EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a Registered Respiratory Therapist at the
Agency’s Pittsburgh VA Healthcare System facility in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, that was subsequently amended, claiming discrimination
and hostile work environment harassment based on disability and in reprisal for prior protected
activity. Initially, she alleged that she was subjected to harassing comments and emails, unfair
scheduling, orientation training, and committee participation; her work and time management
was scrutinized; she was asked to provide additional medical documentation; she was accused of
abusing sick leave; she had her lights turned off; and she was subjected to inappropriate postings


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2022000226

on her locker and an unfair division of work assignments. She also alleged that her first-level
supervisor instructed her to provide medical certification for weekly medical appointments, she
was bypassed for overtime on three dates, and her second-level supervisor instructed her to
provide medical certification for her weekly medical appointments. She amended her complaint
to allege that other employees continued to turn off the overhead lights whenever Complainant
left the room and then turn off the task lights when she turns the overhead lights back on; she has
had to use a mobile computer workstation that she felt was unsafe; she had to use sick leave to
take the day off because of the hostile work environment; she was bypassed when overtime was
made available to other employees; and, when she learned that a new schedule had been posted
that denied her earlier request for a reasonable accommodation and after she tried to discuss it
with her second-level supervisor, he told her that things were escalating and she could not come
into his office and speak to him without a union representative.

The Agency dismissed several of the claims in the initial complaint as untimely, noting that they
were not raised with an EEO Counselor within 45 days of their occurrence. However, the
Agency still considered these claims as related to the overall harassment claim.

After an investigation, Complainant requested a final agency decision (FAD). In accordance with
Complainant’s request, the Agency issued its first FAD, addressing only the initial claims,
concluding that Complainant failed to establish a link between the alleged harassing conduct and
her disability or prior EEO activity and to prove the alleged discrimination, noting the Agency
had provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory and non-retaliatory reasons for its actions. The
Agency rescinded the first FAD and issued a second FAD that included the amended claims. The
second FAD reaffirmed the dismissal of the untimely claims and found that, even upon
considering the amended claims, Complainant still failed to establish a link between the alleged
harassing conduct and her disability or prior EEO activity necessary to prove the alleged
discrimination and retaliation, as the Agency had provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory and
non-retaliatory reasons for its actions. Complainant appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2020002255, the Commission affirmed the Agency’s FAD finding no
discrimination or unlawful retaliation.

In the instant request for reconsideration, we have carefully reviewed Complainant’s arguments
and determine that the matters either were raised or could have been raised below. We note that
during the original appeal from the Agency’s final order, Complainant presented a number of
arguments, which have been essentially replicated in the instant request. We emphasize that a
request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A
(Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20,
2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.
                                                3                                    2022000226

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2020002255 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 22, 2022
Date
