             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Kip D., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                   Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                               (Customs and Border Protection),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021003970

                                Hearing No. 450-2018-00113X

                              Agency No. HS-CBP-013292-2017

                                          DECISION

On June 22, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
May 21, 2021 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Supervisory Border
Patrol Agent, GS-1896-13, at the Agency’s Border Patrol Academy in Artesia, New Mexico.

On June 1, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of race (African-American), sex (male), and reprisal for prior protected
EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2021003970

       1.      on May 9, 2017, he was suspended for a period of 14 days, from May 21, 2017 to
               June 4, 2017, for the charge of Conduct Unbecoming of a Supervisory Law
               Enforcement Officer; and

       2.      on May 9, 2017, he was relieved of his instructor duties with the U.S. Border
               Patrol Academy located in Artesia, New Mexico.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

On May 17, 2016, Complainant was charged with domestic violence and aggravated assault by
the Tucson Police Department (Tucson PD). The alleged victim was Complainant’s then-
girlfriend and coworker, Border Patrol Agent, GS-1896-07 (Agent) (White, female, no prior
EEO activity). Report of Investigation (ROI) at 195-212.

On May 19, 2016, Complainant was suspended and assigned to administrative duties, pending
the outcome of an investigation into his arrest. ROI at 297-98. In contrast, no discipline was
imparted to the Agent. The decision not to discipline her was made by the Division Chief
(Division Chief). ROI at 132. Assistant Chief Patrol Agent 1 (Assistant Chief 1) is identified as
a person co-responsible for the decision not to discipline the Agent. ROI at 136-39.

On June 21, 2016, Complainant pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of disorderly conduct
and was sentenced to a one-year term of unsupervised probation. ROI at 214-21.

The Agency’s Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR) conducted an internal investigation
into Complainant’s conduct. During the investigation, Complainant admitted to having an
argument and being physical with the Agent. ROI at 234-37. OPR’s investigation concluded on
December 6, 2016. ROI at 173. A report was drafted and provided to management. See ROI at
117.

In a letter dated March 7, 2017, Complainant was notified of a proposed 14-day suspension from
duty and pay for Conduct Unbecoming a Supervisory Law Enforcement Officer. ROI 154-56. It
was issued by Complainant’s third-level supervisor, the Deputy Chief (Deputy Chief). Id.; ROI
at 107-12. Complainant responded to this letter, via his counsel, on April 5, 2017. ROI at 158-
63. Complainant countered that a 14-day suspension was unnecessarily harsh and requested that
the suspension be reduced to five days for disruptive behavior. Id.

Complainant first contacted an EEO Counselor on April 20, 2017, following notice of the
proposed suspension. On May 9, 2017, Complainant’s fourth-level supervisor, the Chief Patrol
Agent (Chief), upheld Complainant’s 14-day suspension. Complainant served his suspension
from May 21, 2017 to June 4, 2017. ROI at 165-67; 169.
In addition to the suspension, Complainant stated that he was notified by Assistant Chief Patrol
Agent 2 that he was relieved of instructor duties; later, Complainant stated, Deputy Chief also
told him that he would no longer be allowed to teach at the Academy. ROI at 25.
                                                 3                                     2021003970

Teaching at the Academy was one of Complainant’s duties at the time. Id. In his affidavit,
Deputy Chief said he did not recall this decision and believed Complainant returned to his
teaching duties after serving his suspension. ROI at 110. However, Chief affirmed he was
involved in this decision and that various policies and procedures allow for removing an
instructor from teaching duty based on Conduct Unbecoming. ROI at 119. He also received
verbal guidance and direction from Office of Training and Development, Executive Director
(Executive Director) and the Deputy Assistant Commissioner. Id.

Complainant stated that he believed his race and sex were factors in in his discipline because the
Agent is a White female and she received no discipline for her actions. ROI at 23. Complainant
affirmed the Agent’s actions included assaulting him, destroying government property, and
hindering Tucson PD’s investigation. ROI at 22. In addition, he claimed that the Agent’s
supervisor told her that, “[Y]ou are a woman and you will always be the victim.” ROI at 23.
Complainant acknowledged that the Agent had no prior EEO activity.

Complainant identified the Training Operations Supervisor, GS-1896-14 (Training Supervisor)
(Black, male, prior EEO activity), 2 as a comparator who, Complainant believed, received lesser
discipline because he had no prior EEO activity. ROI at 24-25. According to Complainant, the
Training Supervisor was placed on administrative leave but not suspended when his wife, a
fellow Agency employee, reported that he was abusing her. Id. The record includes an
organization chart which shows that the Training Supervisor is not the same grade as
Complainant, has a different supervisor from Complainant, and works in a different branch than
Complainant. See ROI at 279.

Complainant also identified one additional comparator who he believed was treated more
favorably than him, namely Supervisory Agent (White, male, no prior EEO activity). The record
shows that Supervisory Agent had a proposed suspension of 14 days reduced to 7 days and was
relieved of his instructor status, for “failure to follow [Agency] policy” on fraternization. ROI at
275; 277. The Supervisory Agent was, at the time of the investigation, at the same grade and
series as Complainant. Id.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing
but subsequently withdrew his request. On April 15, 2021, the AJ issued the order granting the
withdrawal and subsequently sent the case back to the Agency to issue the decision.
Consequently, the Agency issued a final agency decision (FAD) pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination as alleged.


2
 We note that, while Complainant assumes the Training Supervisor has no prior EEO activity,
an EEO Investigator’s note in the Summary of Investigation indicates that a search of the
Agency’s EEO database shows the Training Supervisor did have prior EEO activity. ROI at 100.
There are no further details on the matter in the record.
                                                4                                    2021003970


                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant argues that the FAD should be overturned. Principally, he contends that he was
disciplined while the Agent who complained that he was violent, received no punishment. He
also submits that the investigation was inadequate.

The Agency opposes the appeal and requests that the Commission affirm the FAD. As for the
investigation being incomplete, the Agency contends that the argument is meritless because
further investigation would not prove discriminatory motive on its part. Because Complainant
failed to show pretext by a preponderance of the evidence and failed to make a prima facie case
of disparate treatment, the Agency asks that its denial of claims 1 and 2 be affirmed.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard
of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Complaint Processing

We begin with Complainant’s procedural arguments. Here, Complainant argues that the FAD
should be overturned because the EEO Investigator failed to conduct a complete investigation;
that is, the EEO Investigator did not obtain documents related to the suspension and removal of
instructor duties for Supervisory Agent. In addition, the EEO Investigator did not provide
evidence related to Training Supervisor’s EEO activity.

Upon review of the entire record, we are not persuaded that the investigation into Complainant’s
complaint was incomplete or improper. Specifically, with regard to Supervisory Agent, we find
that the information provided in the record indicates that he was not treated more favorably as
compared to Complainant. With regard to Complainant’s contentions regarding the Agency’s
alleged failure to obtain evidence related to the Training Supervisor’s EEO activity, we find that
the Training Supervisor is not a proper comparator, as he holds a different title and is under a
different supervisory chain than Complainant.
                                                5                                    2021003970

We here note that Complainant had requested a hearing and could have taken the opportunity at
the hearing stage to further develop the record. See EEO MD-110, at Chap. 7, § I. However,
Complainant failed to do so. As a result, we see no need not entertain Complainant’s request to
sanction the Agency. Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the investigative file contains
sufficient information upon which to determine whether or not the complained-of Agency
actions were the result of an unlawful discriminatory motive.

Disparate Treatment

We turn now to Complainant’s arguments regarding the merits of his case. A claim of disparate
treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie
case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an
inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse
employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v.
Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate
responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency
acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether a complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination on the
alleged bases, we find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions in claims 1 and 2. In claim 1, Deputy Chief recommended the 14-day suspension for
Complainant for Conduct Unbecoming a Supervisory Law Enforcement Officer. Deputy Chief
noted that Complainant was arrested for domestic violence, pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct,
and was sentenced to one year of unsupervised probation. Chief upheld the suspension. For
claim 2, the Chief, who affirmed that he was responsible for removing Complainant from his
teaching duties, averred that he was following established protocols and verbal guidance
provided by upper management when he made this decision.

As the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, Complainant has
the burden of establishing that the Agency’s stated reasons were merely pretext for
discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996).
                                                6                                    2021003970

Indicators of pretext include, but are not limited to, discriminatory statements or past personal
treatment attributable to those responsible for the personnel action that led to the filing of the
complaint, comparative or statistical data revealing differences in treatment across various
protected-group lines, unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard
procedures without explanation or justification, or inadequately explained inconsistencies in the
evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12,
2015).

In arguing pretext, Complainant asserted that he was the only individual who was disciplined for
the events of May 16, 2017, even though he indicated that the Agent assaulted him, lied to
Tucson PD, and refused to cooperate. He also alleged that Supervisory Agent and Training
Supervisor were treated better than he was. Complainant again attributed the disparate treatment
to his race, sex, and EEO activity.

We are simply unpersuaded by Complainant’s evidence of pretext based on his proffered
comparators. While we are mindful that the Agent was involved in the same incident, however,
the Tucson PD report noted that she was the victim. Furthermore, Complainant, the Agent, and
Training Supervisor all held different positions under different supervisors. To demonstrate that
another employee is a similarly situated comparator, Complainant must show that all relevant
aspects of the comparator’s work situation were nearly identical to his own. Martinez v. Dep’t of
Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113436 (Nov. 1. 2011) (finding comparators were not
similarly situated when they had different supervisors and/or a different chain of command than
complainant). Given the differences in title, grade, and supervision between Complainant, the
Agent, and Training Supervisor, we are disinclined to find them to be similarly situated.

Furthermore, while we acknowledge that Complainant proffered Supervisory Agent as a
comparator, we note that Supervisory Agent was only charged with fraternization which is a very
different matter from Complainant’s charge. Because we find that the misconduct did not
involve similar circumstances, Supervisory Agent is not similarly situated to Complainant. See
Brittney B. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182349 (May 22, 2019) (finding that
comparators can be excluded from discrimination analysis based on dissimilar misconduct).

After careful consideration of the evidence of record, we find no persuasive evidence that the
Agency’s articulated reasons were pretext for discrimination. The Commission has long held
that agencies have broad discretion to set policies and carry out personnel decisions and should
not be second-guessed by the reviewing authority absent evidence of unlawful motivation.
Vanek v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05940906 (Jan. 16, 1997). As the employer,
the Agency has broad discretion to determine how best to manage its operations and may make
decisions, including personnel decisions, and also terminations, on any basis except a basis that
is unlawful under the discrimination statutes. See Furnco Construction, supra; Tex. Dep’t of
Cmty. Affairs, 450 U.S. at 253. An employer is entitled to make its own business judgments.
The reasonableness of the employer’s decision may, of course, be probative of whether it is
pretext. Therefore, our analysis focuses on the Agency's motivation, not its business judgment.
Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d 1003, 1012 n.6 (1st Cir. 1979).
                                                  7                                 2021003970

In other words, it is not the function of this Commission to substitute its judgment for that of
management officials who are familiar with the needs of their facility, and who are in a better
position to make decisions, unless other facts suggest that proscribed considerations of bias
entered the decision-making process. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No.
05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996).

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                8                                     2021003970

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 15, 2021
Date
