             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Mark F., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of Defense
                                (Defense Intelligence Agency),
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2021000717

                                 Agency No. DIA-2020-00025

                                          DECISION

On November 6, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 2, 2020 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Intelligence
Officer (Watch), GG-10, in the Intelligence Section at an Agency facility in Korea. Complainant
began employment with the Agency on August 19, 2019, with a two-year probationary period.

On March 2, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the basis of disability (Asperger Syndrome) when, on November 1, 2019,
management issued Complainant a Notice of Removal effective November 23, 2019 for
disrespectful and unacceptable conduct.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2021000717

The Agency accepted Complainant’s complaint for EEO investigation. The investigative record
contains a copy of an Agency’s Incident Report concerning Complainant, dated October 18,
2019. The Incident Report states, on September 30, 2019, during a training session about two
months after he was hired, Complainant threw a book at the Job Trainer (“T1”) hitting him in his
leg and then went toward T1 showing an obscene gesture and stating, “screw you.” The Report
stated that T1 felt threatened by Complainant’s aggressive behavior and that Complainant
continued to display frustration and annoyance when discussing the incident with the Office
Deputy Chief (ODC1) the same day, by hitting a cubicle and slamming a door. The Report
added, on October 12, 2019, during an incident interview, Complainant became agitated, began
jumping up and down, and yelling “fuck you.”

The Report noted that Complainant indicated Asperger Syndrome on his Disability Self-
Identification Form and on his Agency security paperwork for his background investigation. 2 On
November 1, 2019, the Agency issued Complainant a Notice of Termination during his
probationary period, citing “exhibit[ing] a pattern of disrespectful and unacceptable conduct
during the two months that you have been employed at [the Agency.]” The Agency cited two
incidents of misconduct – one with T1 and one with ODC1.

Complainant acknowledged his behavior in writing, stating, “There is no excuse for the behavior
I exhibited.” Notwithstanding, Complainant stated that he felt that T1 was being “patronizing”
and condescending when Complainant asked questions during training. He stated that the
Agency failed to consider his medical condition when determining his penalty. Complainant
stated that he did not request reasonable accommodation regarding his Asperger Syndrome.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

The instant appeal from Complainant followed. On appeal, Complainant stated that the Agency
Psychologist stated that he tried to use his medical condition as an excuse for his behavior, which
indicates bias.




2
  In addition, Complainant stated that on September 30, 2019, after the incident with T1, he
informed management of his Asperger Syndrome. Complainant also asserted that, on October
11, 2019, during an interview regarding the incident, Complainant notified a Special Agent and
Agency Psychologist of his medical condition.
                                                3                                     2021000717

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Under the Commission's regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o)
and (p).

Assuming, without finding, that Complainant is an individual with a disability within the
meaning of the Rehabilitation Act, we find that Complainant has not shown that the Agency
failed to provide him reasonable accommodation when it investigated a physical and verbal
altercation he had with his Job Trainer, as well as a management official, and subsequently
removed him from employment for misconduct during the first few months of his employment.

The Rehabilitation Act does not require employers to excuse violations of conduct standards that
are job-related and consistent with business necessity as a reasonable accommodation. See
Johnson v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Petition No. 03940100 (March 28, 1996). “[A]n agency
does not have a duty to excuse an employee’s misconduct as a form of reasonable
accommodation to that employee’s disability where such misconduct would result in discipline
or discharge if committed by another employee.” Gibson v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC
Request No. 05920776 (March 25, 1993) (citing Stallworth v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC
Appeal No. 01893705 (January 29, 1990), request to reopen denied in EEOC Request No.
05900416 (August 2, 1990) (complainant was not a qualified disabled person because, by
assaulting a supervisor, he had engaged in conduct for which the agency customarily terminated
employees and the agency was not required to accommodate complainant by excusing his violent
conduct). An employer may discipline an individual with a disability for violating a workplace
conduct standard even if the misconduct resulted from the disability, provided that the conduct
standard is job-related and is consistent with business necessity. Enforcement Guidance on the
Americans with Disabilities Act and Psychiatric Disabilities, Questions 30, 31 (March 25, 1997).
Here, while it is possible that Complainant’s behavior was related to his disability, it is
undisputed that he engaged in misconduct amounting to both physical and verbal threats towards
a colleague and disrespectful conduct towards a management official within his first two months
of work. The Agency’s conduct standards prohibiting this type of behavior was clearly job-
related and consistent with business necessity.
                                                4                                    2021000717

As such, we concur with the Agency that there is no support for a finding that it needed to excuse
Complainant’s misconduct as an accommodation to his disability.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final agency decision finding no discrimination.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                5                                     2021000717

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations



June 6, 2022
Date
