              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Ellen M., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                      Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021003032

                                 Hearing No. 420-2019-00388X

                                  Agency No. 4G-390-0114-20

                                           DECISION

On April 15, 2021 Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 5, 2021 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier, Q-01,
at the Agency’s Pass Christian Post Office in Pass Christian, Mississippi.

On November 5, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of disability (Physical) and in reprisal for prior protected
EEO activity when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2021003032

       1. On June 23, 2020, she became aware that her request to detail to an opportunity as an
          Acting Supervisor (204-B) would not be granted; and

       2. On September 1, 2020, she was issued a Notice of Removal. 2

Claim 1 – Denied Detail Opportunity

Complainant averred that, on June 23, 2020, she was told by the Postmaster that she would not
help her progress in her career because she keeps filing EEOs. According to Complainant, on
June 30, 2020, she asked Postmaster if she could go on a detail to the Biloxi Post Office.
Complainant claimed that she learned of the opportunity from a Supervisor, Customer Services
at the Biloxi facility, and she asked the Postmaster if she could go. She said the Postmaster and
her Manager, Post Office Operations denied her the opportunity because of her EEO complaints.
Complainant stated that the Postmaster told Complainant that she would not allow her to go
because she had filed EEO and harassment complaints against her. Complainant attached a
lengthy hand-written statement describing the conversation with the Postmaster about her
request. She asked the Postmaster about the detail, and two days later, the Postmaster told her
“no” and said Complainant “wasn’t even able to manage myself or my mail route, that I was not
a team player and that I played too many games.” Complainant claimed that the Postmaster made
it verbally clear that she would have allowed her to go on details and help her advance, but she
kept filing EEOs and harassment charges against her, so she would never help promote
Complainant.

The Postmaster denied telling Complainant she would not allow her to detail because she filed
EEO complaints. The Postmaster stated that she had just recently allowed Complainant to detail
and that she needed her in the office and that is why they she did not allow her to detail.

Claim 2 – Notice of Removal

On July 30, 2020, Complainant completed a CA-2A, Notice of Recurrence. In that form,
Complainant stated that on July 11, 2020, she was “carrying a heavy, large parcel through a
closed gate with dogs. About 5:00-5:30 PM I believe – BC it’s exactly where I was hurt and
being treated for, from 10/25/18.” On August 13, 2020, Complainant’s doctor’s office faxed
over the revised CA-17. On that same date, August 13, 2020, Complainant’s representative had
the initial interview with the EEO Counselor.

S1 stated that Complainant filed a CA-2A for a recurrence of old injury claiming that she is
constantly in pain since the incident on July 11th. She is claiming “extreme stress from
Management rushing her, threatening discipline, issuing discipline, Investigated Interviews,
harassment and retaliation.”


2
 Complainant raised disability as a basis of discrimination in her formal complaint; however, in
her affidavit Complainant stated that medical condition was not a factor in the Agency’s actions,
only her prior protected EEO activity.
                                                 3                                      2021003032

On August 13, 2020, Postmaster received a surveillance video from the homeowner where the
injury/aggravation allegedly occurred. The Postmaster viewed the video and gleaned from it that
the dogs did not jump on the employee as Complainant had claimed. The Postmaster stated that
the video showed the carrier carrying a large package, through a gate with dogs. The video did
show that three dogs were around, and it appeared that they were licking her, but they did not
jump on her. The Postmaster stated the video refuted Complainant’s claim that the dogs were
jumping on her. Agency management therefore perceived that Complainant falsely claimed a
recurrence of an on-the-job injury.

Management conducted an investigative interview on August 18, 2020. S1 said he provided
Complainant a chance to explain her side during the Investigative Interview. The record
contains a Manager’s Statement from S1 detailing the events that occurred on July 11, 2020. S1
stated that Complainant should be held accountable for her actions by receiving a “minimal [sic]
seven-day suspension, due to the severity of the infraction, and any other fines or penalties…I
am in hope that the corrective actions or removal will impress on [Complainant] the seriousness
of her actions.”

Thereafter, on September 1, 2020, Complainant was issued a Notice of Removal. The record
before us does not contain documentation showing that the Removal was actually implemented.
The record does show that S1 signed the Notice of Removal after consultation with the
Postmaster. The Notice cited three provisions. The Notice stated that Complainant’s actions and
conduct are in contravention of the Employee and Labor Relations Manual (ELM) 665.11
(loyalty), 665.13 (Discharge of duties), 665.16 (Behavior and Personal Habits). The Agency
stated the last section was the section cited as requiring that postal employees be honest, reliable,
trustworthy, courteous, and of good character and reputation. The Notice of Removal stated that
Complainant’s explanation failed to “adequately address the inconsistencies from the
surveillance video and the time you claim to have injured herself is contradictory to her written
statement and the statements provided in the investigative interview. Your explanation failed to
adequately address the inconsistencies.” The Notice of Removal stated that Complainant filed a
CA-2A claiming a recurrence of injury on July 11, 2020 for an injury originally occurring on
October 25, 2018. On that CA-2A, Complainant certified that the provided information is true
and accurate. The Notice stated the facts attained during the investigation support the charge that
Complainant provided false information on an official record. 3

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before a United States Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely
requested a hearing but subsequently withdrew her request.



3
  Complainant subsequently filed a grievance regarding the removal. As of the close of the
investigation, no final determination on the grievance had been issued.
                                               4                                   2021003032

Subsequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the
decision, the Agency found that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as
alleged.

This appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant offered supplemental evidence to show that the Postmaster and her
supervisor, who recommended the removal, likely committed perjury when they testified in the
affidavits. For example, Complainant submitted evidence she claims show that officials became
aware of her EEO activities in December 2020. In addition, Complainant also offers a recording
purportedly of the Postmaster speaking to Complainant on June 12, 2020. Complainant contends
that the clipped recording clearly establishes that the Postmaster made reference to
Complainant’s prior EEO activities as being the reason she would not allow Complainant to
advance or transfer. The seven-second portion of the 22-second long audio transcribed as
follows:

       “I would help you 110%, but you continue to file EEOs against me. You continue…to
       talk…to say I’m harassing you. You continued to f***ing not be able to do your job. So,
       how am I going to promote you?”

Finally, Complainant submitted letters from customers to the Postmaster, which management did
not share with Complainant. Some of the letters address Complainant’s good work and the
others address the fact that Complainant was being continually surveilled by S1 and the
Postmaster. Accordingly, Complainant requests that the Commission reverse the final decision.

In response, the Agency says Complainant’s appeal is meritless and that the Commission should
not consider the recording, which had not been produced during the investigation. The Agency
also stated the record contained testimony to document that the Postmaster did not deny her a
detail, because no detail opportunity existed, and she was terminated for perceived fraud on the
Agency.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                5                                    2021003032

We generally do not consider evidence that has not been presented during the course of the
investigation. In this case, however, we exercise our discretion to require the Agency to conduct
a supplemental investigation regarding the authenticity of the taped recording to determine
whether that was the Postmaster’s actual statement and whether it accurately represents the
conversation. The recording may be relevant to establish whether or not the Postmaster had
animosity toward Complainant based on her prior EEO activity.

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s April 5, 2021 decision and REMAND the matter for a
supplemental investigation, consistent with the Order below.

                                            ORDER

Within 90 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct and complete a
supplemental investigation. This supplemental investigation shall include undertaking efforts to
authenticate the audio tape of the Postmaster to verify that it was the Postmaster and is an
accurate representation of the conversation that the Postmaster had with Complainant, as
submitted by Complainant on appeal. The investigation shall also include any other relevant
information or evidence related to the audio recording, including the manner in which it was
obtained. After doing so, the Agency shall provide Complainant a copy of the supplemented
record with an opportunity to respond and include her response in the record. The Agency shall
then issue a new final decision with appropriate analysis of the relevant facts with appeal rights
to the Commission.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
                                                6                                     2021003032

The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the
Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29
C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has
the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph
below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil
action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline
stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil
action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                 7                                      2021003032

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  8                                     2021003032

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 12, 2022
Date
