             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Dominica H., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                       (Southern Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021002704

                                 Agency No. 4G-330-0304-20

                                          DECISION

On April 7, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
March 11, 2021, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier, Q-01,
Step E, at the Agency’s Pompano-Atlantic Branch facility in Coral Springs, Florida.

On August 3, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the basis of religion (Muslim) when: on dates to be specified from May 13, 2020,
and continuing, she was denied a higher-level detail.

The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.
Complainant affirmed that she applied for many positions on eCareer and did not get them.
Complaint File (CF) at 74. The record shows applications dated April 17, 2020; May 4, 2020;


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                     2021002704

June 23, 2020; and July 18, 2020. CF at 80. In terms of her qualifications, Complainant pointed
to her bachelor’s degree in Business Administration and 10 years of experience in office
management. CF at 75. On May 8, 2020, Complainant wrote a message to “the
Manager/Supervisor of Atlantic Post Office” stating: “I . . . would like to step up and want to be
trained for supervision whenever is possible (204B position).” CF at 84. Complainant signed it,
dated it, and noted on it that “Supervisor refused to sign 5/8/20.” Id.

Manager of Customer Services (Manager) affirmed that he denied Complainant’s April 21, 2020,
request for a higher-level detail because her attendance and performance needed improvement
and she failed to follow simple instructions. CF at 90. According to Manager, the qualifications
for a higher-level detail include having good attendance, following instructions, and possessing
leadership qualities. CF at 91. The most important factors in his decision were attendance and
performance. Id. Complainant’s supervisor (Supervisor) affirmed she was not involved in the
decision regarding Complainant’s request for a detail. CF at 101.

The record also includes documentation by Manager of Complainant’s attendance and
performance issues. For example, Manager sent an email to himself on March 6, 2020, stating
that on that day Complainant abandoned her route and refused to submit a required Form 3971
before that absence. CF at 123; 125. On April 21, 2020, Manager sent another email to himself
noting that Complainant had asked him about being given a 204B assignment, to which he had
replied that her attendance was unsatisfactory, including unscheduled occurrences, and that he
would provide a Form 3972 to her. CF at 126; 136-37. A few minutes later that same day, he
emailed himself to note that he had intervened when he saw Complainant in what he considered
to be an overly long conversation between her, Supervisor, and another supervisor. CF at 127.
Manager also wrote in that email that he gave Complainant instructions to do her route under
time that day, and she refused. Id. For her part, Complainant said she was unaware of any
attendance issues; in addition, she averred that she is very knowledgeable in office
administration, and has excellent customer service and great communication. CF at 75.

In her affidavit, Complainant provided five potential comparators, including City Carrier 1
(Muslim), who, according to Complainant, asked for a detail but never heard back from
Manager. CF at 75. She also named four other possible comparators who Complainant asserted
were not Muslim and were assigned details by Manager. 2 CF at 76. Manager could not identify
two of Complainant’s purported comparators. Supervisor noted that one tentative comparator
did not work at Complainant’s facility. Of the purported comparators who could be verified and
investigated by the EEO Investigator were: City Carrier 2 (religion unknown) and Rural Carrier
(religion unknown).

Manager acknowledged that City Carrier 2 had been granted a higher-level detail, though he
attributed that to City Carrier 2 having covered details before, requiring little to no training to do
the job, and possessing supervisory experience. CF at 92.


2
  Complainant identified the potential comparators only by position and first name (with a note
that the spelling may be wrong) in her affidavit.
                                                 3                                     2021002704

Manager also averred that Rural Carrier was already on a higher-level detail when Manager
arrived at the facility and had extensive experience as a supervisor. CF at 94. Supervisor
confirmed City Carrier 2’s supervisory experience and Rural Carrier’s previous training and
knowledge in assisting with rural carriers. CF at 104-05. As for City Carrier 1, Manager and
Supervisor thought City Carrier 1 was offered a detail and refused it. CF at 95, 106.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing or a final agency decision within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the
Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination as alleged. Specifically, assuming that Complainant established a prima facie
case of disparate treatment, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
action. These were that Complainant’s performance and attendance issues, including
abandoning her route, failure to follow instructions, unauthorized overtime, and refusal to fill out
required paperwork, did not qualify her for assignment to a higher-level detail. The Agency
further found City Carrier 2 and Rural Carrier were not similarly situated because they had
experience in supervising employees that Complainant did not possess. Hence, the Agency
determined that Complainant did not prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency’s reasons were pretext for discrimination.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant does not provide any new arguments on appeal and merely reiterates arguments
previously provided. However, she postulates that the Agency’s position on comparators is
misleading. Complainant argues that City Carrier 2’s and Rural Carrier’s supervisory training
should not matter, as a higher-level detail is designed to give an employee supervisory
experience. She also claims that City Carrier 1 may have been offered a detail, but according to
Complainant, he had to file a formal EEO complaint before it was offered.

Complainant asserts that an adequate investigation would have provided more information on
City Carrier 1 and the two other comparators that she identified by first name in her formal
complaint. She asks that, under the circumstances, the Commission at least draw an adverse
inference against the Agency and remand the matter for adequate development of the record for
the purpose of evaluating comparators.

The Agency did not submit an appellate brief.
                                                4                                     2021002704

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Complaint Processing

We begin with Complainant’s concerns that the complaint was not adequately investigated.
Here, Complainant argues that the final agency decision should be overturned. Conversely, she
requests that an adverse influence should be drawn against the Agency because it did not
investigate two comparators. She also claims that the Agency did not investigate whether City
Carrier 1 was only awarded a detail position after he filed a formal EEO complaint.

Upon review of the entire record, the Commission is not persuaded that the investigation into
Complainant's complaint was incomplete or improper. The regulation at 29 C.F.R. §1614.108(b)
requires an agency to conduct an “impartial” and “appropriate” investigation. The investigation
includes sworn statements from Complainant, employees, and management officials, as well as
other documentation pertaining to the matters herein. Based on the foregoing, we conclude that
the investigative file contains sufficient information upon which to determine whether or not the
complained-of Agency actions were the result of an unlawful discriminatory motive. Moreover,
the three rural carriers are not proper comparators as Complainant, as a city carrier, holds a
different job than they do. As to City Carrier 1, Complainant could have provided an affidavit
from him as her witness. Finally, for purposes of our analysis, we assume that City Carrier 2 is
outside Complainant’s protected group. As such, we do not need to supplement the
investigation.

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n.13; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978).
                                                5                                    2021002704

The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has
met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St.
Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination on the
alleged bases, we find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions. Namely, the Agency did not assign Complainant to a higher-level detail due to her
performance and attendance issues. She also failed to follow simple instructions. According to
Manager, the qualifications for a higher-level detail include having good attendance, following
instructions, and possessing leadership qualities, with the most important criteria being
attendance and performance.

As the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, Complainant
now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency’s stated reasons were merely a pretext for
discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996). As
the employer, the Agency has broad discretion to determine how best to manage its operations
and may make decisions, including personnel decisions, on any basis except a basis that is
unlawful under the discrimination statutes. See Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567
(1978); Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253. An employer is entitled to make its own business judgments.
The reasonableness of the employer's decision may, of course, be probative of whether it is
pretext. Therefore, our analysis focuses on the Agency's motivation, not its business judgment.
Loeb v. Textron, Inc., 600 F.2d 1003, 1012 n.6 (1st Cir. 1979).

Complainant averred that she believed that she was qualified based on her years of experience
and her education, yet she was repeatedly denied higher-level details. The only evidence she
submitted beyond her own statement was a computer print-out of positions to which she had
applied and for which she had not been non-selected, a copy of a grievance form she filed, and a
handwritten note informing the Manager/Supervisor of her facility of her desire to be trained for
a 204B detail. Furthermore, Complainant stated that she did was unaware of any attendance
issues and had great customer service and communication, yet Manager has documented that
Complainant abandoned her route, had unscheduled absences, and refused orders. Neither
Complainant's affidavit nor the materials she appended to them are sufficient to contradict the
reasons for her denial of a supervisory detail that are put forward by Manager.
                                                6                                     2021002704

In arguing pretext, Complainant put forward five potential comparators in her affidavit. Because
Rural Carrier holds a different job than Complainant does, he is not a proper comparator. To
demonstrate that another employee is a similarly situated comparator, Complainant must show
that all relevant aspects of the comparator’s work situation were nearly identical to his own.
Martinez v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113436 (Nov. 1, 2011) (finding
comparators were not similarly situated when they had different supervisors and/or a different
chain of command than complainant). In addition, this holds true for the two other purported
carriers Complainant raised during the investigation who are also rural carriers and, therefore,
not proper comparators, either. City Carrier 1 is within Complainant’s protected class.
Furthermore, Manager and Supervisor averred that City Carrier 1 was offered a detail and turned
it down. Therefore, Complainant has not established that the Agency’s reasons were pretext.

Complainant argued that the Agency discriminated against her because City Carrier 2 was
offered a supervisory detail while she was not. We have assumed that City Carrier 2 is outside
of Complainant’s protected group for the purpose or our analysis and is a proper comparator.
However, Manager explained the difference in treatment. Namely, Manager averred that City
Carrier 2, unlike Complainant, had covered details before, required little to no training to do the
job, and possessed supervisory experience.        We find that Manager provided legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for the selection of City Carrier 2 for supervisory details and not
Complainant. Therefore, we determine that Complainant has not shown that the Agency’s
reasons were pretext for discrimination based on her religion.

Based on the record before us, we conclude that Complainant has not met her burden of showing,
by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency’s reasons were a pretext to mask
discriminatory animus. Moreover, the Commission has long held that agencies have broad
discretion to set policies and carry out personnel decisions and should not be second-guessed by
the reviewing authority absent evidence of unlawful motivation. Vanek v. Dep't of the Treasury,
EEOC Request No. 05940906 (Jan. 16, 1997).

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                  7                                   2021002704

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                8                                    2021002704

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 18, 2022
Date
