             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Zonia C., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Merrick B. Garland,
                                       Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                                  (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                            Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2021001326

                                Hearing No. 451-2015-00150X

                                 Agency No. BOP-2014-0576

                                          DECISION

On November 14, 2018, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 26, 2018, final order concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Human Resources
Specialist, GS-9, at the Agency’s Federal Correctional Institution (FCI) in Three Rivers, Texas.
Complainant began working with the Agency in February 2014, and had no prior experience
working with a Human Resources Department within the federal government.

Complainant stated that during the first few weeks on the job, she observed her first-line
supervisor, the Human Resources Manager (African-American/Black) (Supervisor), make a
racial slur directed toward White members of the FCI Three Rivers staff.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2021001326

Specifically, Complainant stated that the Supervisor called her into her office and told her that
“African-American people needed to stick together because other staff members do not like
African-American people, and they are against [the Supervisor] because she is the only African-
American female manager at FCI Three Rivers.” Complainant averred that a few weeks later,
the Supervisor called her into her office and stated, “You remember what I was telling you
earlier. Look how they announced my daddy’s death and look how they announced [named co-
worker’s] daddy’s death. You see how these crackers do me.” Complainant stated that she
observed that the Supervisor was under the impression that other members of the FCI Three
Rivers staff were prejudiced against the Supervisor because of her race. Complainant added that
during a conversation with a Staff Psychologist (African-American, Black, unknown EEO
activity), they discussed the Supervisor and the colleague indicated that the Supervisor said
something to the effect of trying to make her “feel like the Blacks against the Whites.”

Complainant requested a meeting with the Warden (unknown race, color, and protected activity)
to discuss what she described as a hostile work environment. At that meeting, Complainant
presented the Warden with a memo detailing her allegations of the alleged hostile work
environment. In that memo, Complainant described her early interactions with the Supervisor,
including a conversation where the Supervisor made racial comments to her regarding
management staff. Complainant never reported to management that she was the target of any
racial slurs by any FCI Three Rivers staff member, or that she was the subject of a specific threat
of physical violence by the Supervisor. However, the Warden stated that once he was aware of
the alleged racial slur, he assembled a Threat Assessment Committee to gather facts regarding
the incident. The Threat Assessment Committee confirmed that the Supervisor’s comments were
not directed to Complainant and determined that the subject of the alleged comments “did not
feel threatened nor did she feel that she worked in a hostile work environment.” The Threat
Assessment Committee concluded that a threat did not exist to the individual Complainant had
indicated.

Following the May 2014 meeting, the Associate Warden took a more significant role in daily
management of the Human Resource Department. Specifically, on June 2, 2014, each staff
member was instructed to route all interoffice communication and leave requests through the
Associate Warden.

In June 2014, Complainant informed the Warden about an issue with obtaining leave approval
from the Supervisor. The Warden stated that once he was aware of the issue, he authorized
Complainant to take leave and addressed Complainant’s allegations with the Supervisor.
Complainant’s time and attendance records do not reflect leave denials or that Complainant was
charged with Absence Without Leave (AWOL).

Complainant alleged that there was also an issue with her SF-50 and that the Supervisor
threatened her status as a permanent employee.
                                                3                                    2021001326

The Warden stated that once he became aware of the issue, Complainant was reassured that the
Supervisor was not authorized to remove Complainant and the Associate Warden was instructed
to counsel the Supervisor regarding the alleged removal statements. The Associate Warden
indicated that he spoke with the Supervisor and the Supervisor denied making the alleged
comments to Complainant.

Complainant further raised concerns regarding the timeliness of her performance evaluation.
The Associate Warden reported that he followed up with the Supervisor and Complainant’s prior
employer. He stated that the delay was due to the transmittal of paperwork from Complainant’s
prior institution, but ultimately, Complainant received her evaluation.

Formal Complaint

On August 15, 2014, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (African-American), color (Black), and reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when: from
February 2014 through August 6, 2014, she was subjected to a hostile work environment by
being exposed to racial slurs, lack of guidance and training, delayed approvals of leave requests,
not receiving work appraisals, threats regarding being removed from her position, threats of
physical violence, and being pressured not to write a memo reporting alleged harassment by the
Supervisor. Complainant also alleged that management failed to act on her reports of a hostile
work environment.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely
requested a hearing. Over Complainant's objections, the AJ assigned to the case granted the
Agency’s November 25, 2015, motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision
without a hearing on September 11, 2018.

AJ’s Decision

In the decision, the AJ determined that Complainant failed to state a claim because the alleged
incidents were not of sufficient severity or pervasiveness to constitute an actionable claim. The
AJ further noted that the record evidence failed to support a showing that Complainant was
subjected to an adverse employment action. She explained that the underlying facts of
Complainant’s allegations were not in dispute and Complainant did not suffer a harm or loss
with respect to a term, condition, or privilege of employment for which there is a remedy.

The AJ found that even if Complainant could state a proper claim of discrimination, the record
evidence is insufficient to show that Complainant was subjected to disparate treatment compared
to similarly situated individuals outside her protected class. Moreover, Complainant cannot
establish a prima facie case of reprisal because she conceded that she did not engage in any prior
EEO activity.
                                                4                                     2021001326

As for a hostile work environment, the AJ found that not only is the record evidence insufficient
to support the claim of a hostile work environment, but it is further insufficient to show that the
alleged harassment was based on Complainant’s protected classes. The AJ noted that the
undisputed record does not support Complainant’s claims that her work performance was
unreasonably interfered with or that any conditions of her employment were altered.

The AJ further determined that Complainant’s allegations of discrimination were directly
contradicted by the undisputed record evidence. Specifically, the AJ found that the record
established that Complainant’s leave requests were approved; Complainant was never charged
with AWOL; the appraisal was delayed because of Complainant’s prior employer; and
Complainant received training. Regarding threats of removal, the AJ found that the Supervisor
was not authorized or empowered to remove Complainant and once Complainant apprised
management of concerns, Complainant was assured that the Supervisor had no authority to do so
and took action to convert Complainant to a permanent posting. As for racial slurs, the AJ found
that the racial slur was not directed to a particular staff member and was reviewed by a Threat
Assessment Committee. Moreover, Complainant did not report to management that she was the
subject of a specific physical threat by the Supervisor.

The AJ found that Complainant proffered nothing to suggest that the Supervisor’s actions were a
result of Complainant’s race. Rather, Complainant portrayed the Supervisor as wanting
Complainant to be prejudiced along with her. The AJ concluded that even assuming all of
Complainant’s allegations are true, the Supervisor’s alleged mistreatment of Complainant was
based on Complainant’s failure to support the Supervisor’s prejudice in the workplace, which the
AJ stated is not a protected class under Title VII and does not support a race-based claim of
discrimination. Further, by Complainant’s own admission, management officials were
responsive to her concerns when raised. Therefore, the AJ determined that the Agency
articulated non-discriminatory reasons for its actions along with evidence that it took prompt
corrective remedial action. Finally, the AJ found that Complainant proffered no evidence to
show that the Agency’s legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons were pretextual.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. However, in the final order,
the Agency “strongly urge[d]” Complainant to appeal the AJ’s decision. The Agency asserted
that there were serious issues with the AJ’s findings and conclusions. Specifically, the Agency
argued that the AJ applied an erroneous legal standard for assessing a claim of harassment.

The Agency stated that the AJ incorrectly concluded that Complainant had not established a
claim of discrimination because she proffered nothing to suggest the Supervisor’s actions
directed at Complainant were a result of Complainant’s race. In support, the Agency argued that
the AJ failed to grasp the basis of Complainant’s race discrimination claim; failed to recognize
that racial slurs, in and of themselves, as described in the record, may be sufficiently severe to
constitute a hostile work environment even if the derogatory comments were not aimed at
Complainant or at a person of Complainant’s protected class; and erroneously determined that
because Complainant was not the target of the Supervisor’s racial animus, she could not be
                                                5                                     2021001326

considered aggrieved. The Agency noted that there is no dispute that a third party, such as
Complainant, who is subjected to statements and epithets that denigrate another person of a race
other than that of the third party may legitimately raise a claim of race harassment and may also
raise a claim of retaliation for opposing such statements. The Agency stated that by limiting the
analysis of a race-based claim to exclude third parties, the AJ failed to examine the actual impact
of the Supervisor’s racial comments on Complainant and if Complainant’s multiple exposures to
derogatory remarks constitute severe or pervasive action by the Supervisor. The Agency added
that the AJ failed to assess whether the racial slurs had the effect of poisoning the work
environment and affecting third party individuals such as Complainant.

Despite its adoption of the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination, the Agency recommended remanding the matter for an
administrative hearing. The Agency asserted that dates of reported incidents and management
responses are missing from the record, which are important for assessing the promptness of
management’s responses. The Agency maintained that the record needed further development
regarding management’s response to Complainant’s concerns and issues with the Supervisor’s
behavior. For example, the Agency failed to produce documentary evidence related to the threat
assessment investigation. The Agency noted that further development is needed regarding
Complainant’s allegation that the Supervisor threatened her with physical harm while in a van
pool and that the record contains contradictory accounts as to whether the Associate Warden
dissuaded Complainant from submitting a memorandum to the Warden in which she planned to
set out her complaints against the Supervisor.

Prior Appellate Decision

On September 22, 2020, the Commission issued an appellate decision ordering the Agency to
conduct a supplemental investigation because it deemed the investigation insufficient. Zonia C.
v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001854 (Sept. 22, 2020). Specifically, the
Commission determined that the record was not adequately developed regarding: (1) the
chronology of events; (2) whether a threat assessment took place; (3) alleged physical threats
from Complainant’s supervisor; and (4) whether the Associate Warden dissuaded Complainant
from submitting a memorandum to the Warden regarding her issues with her supervisor. We
further agreed that the AJ failed to consider that racial slurs, in and of themselves, may be
sufficiently severe to constitute a hostile work environment, even if the derogatory comments
were not aimed at Complainant.

The Commission ordered the Agency to:

   a) Further investigate the timeline of events pertaining to Complainant's reports of the
      Supervisor 's use of racial slurs in the workplace and any corrective action taken
      subsequent to management's knowledge of the alleged incidents;
                                                6                                     2021001326

   b) Obtain documentation relating to any threat assessment conducted by management
      officials, including relevant dates, findings, and any other relevant information relating to
      management officials' investigation into Complainant's harassment allegations;

   c) Provide documentary evidence (including race, color, and prior EEO activity) into the
      number and frequency of threat assessments, and the reasons for those investigations; and

   d) Obtain statements regarding the van pool incident, including management officials'
      knowledge of the incident, and any corrective action relating to this incident.


Supplemental Investigation

In accordance with the Order in EEOC Appeal No. 2019001854, the Agency conducted the
supplemental investigation and provided a copy of the supplemental ROI to Complainant on
December 1, 2020. The Investigator noted that many of the key witnesses, including
Complainant, are no longer employed at the Agency. As a result, it was determined that the
original ROI should be re-examined to determine if there was testimony or documentary
evidence that might provide the information being sought. The supplemental investigation
summary further noted that the Supervisor’s use of racial slurs and the van pool incident were
considered in the original investigation under the hostile work environment theory. However, the
Investigator noted that it was a difficult question to answer when Complainant reported the
Supervisor’s use of racial slurs to management officials. Additionally, a threat assessment,
which was conducted in response to Complainant’s coworker (Coworker) reporting that she was
in a hostile work environment and requesting to be removed from the Supervisor’s leadership,
was added to the record.

In response to the supplemental ROI, Complainant contends that the Agency provided the same
ROI to respond to the supplemental investigation and that the Threat Assessment was the only
additional evidence added to the record.

This appeal was docketed in order to address the AJ’s summary judgment decision and the
Agency’s implementation of that decision finding that the Agency did not discriminate against
Complainant, as alleged, now that the appellate record is complete.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission's regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is
“genuine” if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-
moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp.,
846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988).
                                                7                                     2021001326

A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the outcome of the case. In rendering this
appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions, and the Agency’s
final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a)(stating that a “decision on an
appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review…”); see also Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s determination to issue
a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed de novo).

Here, as the matter has been remanded for supplemental investigation and the Agency has
indicated that many of the officials involved have left the Agency, we find that the matter is
appropriate for summary judgment. As such, we shall review the determination by the AJ
finding no discrimination or harassment.

Hostile Work Environment

To establish a claim of harassment a complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to a statutorily
protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).
Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

Therefore, to prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to
conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s
position would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove
that the conduct was taken because of her protected classes. Only if Complainant establishes
both of those elements, hostility and motive, will the question of Agency liability present itself.

We find that Complainant established that she is a member of a protected class based on her race
and that she was subjected to unwelcomed conduct. Complainant asserted that based on her
protected classes, the Supervisor subjected her to a hostile work environment, as evidenced by
exposure to racial slurs, lack of guidance and training, delayed approvals of leave requests, lack
of work appraisals, threats regarding being removed from her position, threats of physical
violence, and being pressured not to write a memo reporting alleged harassment by her
supervisor. Complainant also alleged that management failed to act on her reports of a hostile
work environment.

With respect to the racial slurs, Complainant has established by a preponderance of evidence that
the Supervisor made racially disparaging comments on multiple occasions.
                                                8                                    2021001326

For example, the record reveals that the Supervisor used the word “crackers” when speaking
with Complainant about White employees and attempted to create a divisive atmosphere, which
Complainant reported to multiple management officials. An Executive Assistant/Camp
Administrator affirmed that she was told that the Supervisor called upper management “White
Crackers.” ROI at 364. She further affirmed that Complainant reported that prior to starting, the
Supervisor mentioned that “because they were both Black, they were going to have to stick
together and stay away from the White people.” Id. at 365. The Executive Assistant/Camp
Administrator stated that she went to the Warden with Complainant and he requested that
Complainant document any information she had regarding the Supervisor. Id. When asked if
there was any action by the Warden after receiving the memo from Complainant, the Executive
Assistant/Camp Administrator responded, “not that I know of.” Id. Notably, the Executive
Assistant/Camp Administrator affirmed that she believed that Complainant’s race and color were
factors in the racial slurs made to Complainant. Id.

Coworker testified that Complainant told her that the Supervisor made comments about trying to
stick together because “these people, these ‘Crackers’ actually, were against seeing Black
females succeed.” ROI at 378. The Coworker agreed that Complainant’s race and color were a
factor in the Supervisor’s actions toward Complainant. Similarly, a Staff Psychologist confirmed
that the Supervisor used words like” these crackers” or “these White people.” The Staff
Psychologist stated that she experienced the Supervisor make statements about “these people”
and the Supervisor also informed the Staff Psychologist that she needed to watch out or watch
her back with “these people” in reference to non-African American employees. Id.

Upon review, we find that multiple Agency officials were aware of the Supervisor’s
discriminatory animus. While testimony shows that the Supervisor’s “mentality is “Blacks have
to stick together” and “it’s us against them,” the Supervisor was simply described as saying “a
lot of crazy stuff sometimes.” ROI at 406, 408. In this instance, we find the comments in the
present case were sufficiently severe and pervasive to alter the terms and conditions of
Complainant’s employment and to create an abusive work environment. Specifically, we find
that the Supervisor’s actions directed at Complainant were a result of Complainant’s race.
Multiple witnesses agreed that Complainant was not provided with adequate training and support
from the Supervisor with many concluding that it was because of race and color. Moreover, a
review of the record shows that once Complainant failed to agree with the Supervisor’s
perception that White employees were against Black employees, the Supervisor subjected
Complainant to adverse treatment. Therefore, we determine that Complainant established that
she was subjected to harassment based on her race.

The standard for employer liability for hostile work environment harassment depends typically
on whether or not the harasser is the victim's supervisor. An employer is vicariously liable for a
hostile work environment created by a supervisor. In Vance v. Ball State Univ., 133 S. Ct. 2434
(2013), the Supreme Court held that an employee is a “supervisor” if the employer has
empowered that employee “to take tangible employment actions against the victim, i.e., to effect
a “significant change in employment status, such as hiring, firing, failing to promote,
reassignment with significantly different responsibilities, or a decision causing a significant
                                               9                                    2021001326

change in benefits.”' The Court stated that an employer is liable for hostile work environment
harassment by employees who are not supervisors if the employer was “negligent in failing to
prevent harassment from taking place.” In assessing such negligence, the Court explained, “the
nature and degree of authority wielded by the harasser is an important factor to be considered in
determining whether the employer was negligent.”

Also relevant is “[e]vidence that an employer did not monitor the workplace, failed to respond to
complaints, failed to provide a system for registering complaints, or effectively discouraged
complaints from being filed.” See Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Employer Liability for
Unlawful Harassment by Supervisor, Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999) (updated Notice
Concerning the Supreme Court's Decision in Vance v. Ball State University, 133 S. Ct. 2434
(2013)). Here, we note that in addition to discouraging Complainant from noting her harassment
concerns 2, management officials failed to adequately address the hostile work environment
created by the Supervisor.

We find that considered as a whole, the instant record establishes that Complainant was
subjected to harassment based on race. The alleged harassment also clearly affected the terms
and conditions of her employment as the Supervisor created difficulties when it came to
requesting leave, threatened Complainant’s position, threatened Complainant with violence, and
failed to evaluate Complainant. We further find that these incidents of harassment are
sufficiently severe to constitute a hostile work environment. The Supervisor was responsible for
the race-based harassment which included tangible employment actions, and as Complainant's
supervisor, the Agency is vicariously liable. Although the Warden reported that a threat
assessment was conducted in response to Complainant’s report of a hostile work environment,
the only threat assessment provided by the Agency during the period at issue shows that it was
conducted following reports from another employee that she could not work under the
Supervisor’s leadership. Supplemental ROI at 43.

Based on the foregoing, we find, contrary to the AJ’s decision, that Complainant has established
that she was subjected to harassment for which the Agency is liable.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we REVERSE the Agency’s finding of no discrimination. The
matter is REMANDED to the Agency for further processing in accordance with this decision and
the Order herein.




2
 Complainant’s coworker corroborated Complainant’s allegation that the Associate Warden
made the remark, “y’all know if you write that it is just going to make it worse.” ROI at 387.
                                                10                                   2021001326

                                            ORDER

To the extent it has not already done so, the Agency shall take the following remedial actions:

   1. Within ninety (90) days from the date that this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      complete a supplemental investigation in order to determine Complainant’s entitlement to
      compensatory damages. The Agency shall afford Complainant the opportunity to submit
      evidence in support of her claim for damages within the 90-day time frame, and
      Complainant shall cooperate with any additional evidentiary requests made by the
      Agency. Within thirty (30) days of the date that the Agency determines the amount of
      compensatory damages owed Complainant, the Agency shall pay that amount;

   2. Within ninety (90) days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide a
      minimum of eight hours of in-person or interactive training to all of its managers and
      supervisors at the Three Rivers facility regarding their obligations to prevent unlawful
      harassment under federal EEO statutes.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the statement
entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall include supporting
documentation verifying that the corrective action has been implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at the Federal Correctional Institution (FCI) in Three Rivers,
Texas, copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency’s
duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for
60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted
to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the
Commission’s Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The
report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                                  11                                  2021001326

The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when previously not
uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her
representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                                 12                                     2021001326

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 13                                     2021001326

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 20, 2022
Date
