             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Bryon F., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021002420

                                Hearing No. 520-2020-00396X

                             Agency No. 200H-0523-2018105072

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s February 16, 2021, final decision concerning his complaint of
unlawful employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Agency’s final decision is VACATED, and the complaint is REMANDED for a hearing.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Dialysis Nurse,
Grade 1, at the Boston Veterans Affairs Healthcare System (BVAHS), in West Roxbury,
Massachusetts. During the relevant time, the Nurse Manager was Complainant’s immediate
supervisor and the Chief Nurse was his second level supervisor.

On October 20, 2018, Complainant filed a complaint, which was subsequently amended, alleging
that the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment on the basis of disability (Attention
Deficit Disorder) when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2021002420

   1. On May 16, 2018, the Nurse Manager denied him a reasonable accommodation and
      informed him there were no reassignment opportunities available;

   2. On May 16, 2018, the Nurse Manager issued him an Employee Assistance Program
      (EAP) Form which he signed;

   3. On May 23, 2018, he was reassigned to audit charts;

   4. On May 23, 2018, the Nurse Manager rated his performance as “Unsatisfactory” in an
      interim proficiency evaluation;

   5. On May 24, 2018, he was temporarily reassigned to the Escort Service;

   6. On June 27, 2018, the Professional Standards Board (PSB) recommended that he be
      terminated during his probationary period, but failed to incorporate his information in
      their final summary, did not inform him of his rights, or provide his representative a copy
      of the PSB summary;

   7. On June 28, 2018, he received a Notice of Separation during Probation, effective July 13,
      2018; and

   8. On August 15, 2018, he was constructively discharged when he felt forced to submit a
      letter of resignation

The Agency’s Office of Resolution Management, Diversity and Inclusion (ORMDI) dismissed
claims 1, 3, 4, and 5 as untimely discrete incidents. However, these incidents were accepted for
investigation in support of Complainant’s hostile work environment claim. The Agency
accepted claims 6, 7, and 8 as both timely discrete claims and as incidents in support of
Complainant’s claim of harassment. The Agency found that amended claim 2 was additional
evidence of a hostile work environment by the same management officials in the same service.
Thus, the overall harassment claim, containing claims 1 - 8 was accepted for investigation.

At the conclusion of the investigation on the accepted claims, the Agency provided Complainant
with a copy of the report of investigation (ROI) and notice of right to request a hearing before an
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ).                     Complainant
requested a hearing. While the case was pending before an AJ, the parties filed a Joint Statement
stipulating that claim 1 should be reinstated as a timely discrete claim (along with the other
timely discrete claims 6, 7, and 8). Also, the parties stipulated that claims 3 - 5 should be part of
the overall harassment claim, but not independently actionable claims. Further, the parties
agreed the investigation of claims 1 - 5 was insufficient and that a supplemental investigation
was needed on these incidents. The parties noted claims 6 - 8 should be supplemented by the
investigator as necessary.
                                                3                                     2021002420

On February 25, 2020, the AJ issued a Dismissal Order/Remand to Agency which dismissed the
complaint without prejudice and remanded the matter to the Agency to conduct a supplemental
investigation within 120 days from the date of the Order. Following the supplemental
investigation, the case was returned to the AJ for processing.

On November 3, 2020, the AJ issued a Dismissal Order: Sanctions finding, “Complainant has
repeatedly failed to comply with my orders to produce the discovery, despite the multiple
opportunities I have given him to cure; and he has failed to provide a valid reason for his refusal
to comply.” The AJ found Complainant’s behavior particularly egregious in that he admitted he
intends to use the omitted discovery as exhibits during a hearing. As a result, the AJ dismissed
Complainant’s hearing request and remanded the matter to the Agency for issuance of a final
decision on the merits of Complainant’s complaint.

Thereafter, the Agency issued a final decision on February 16, 2021, finding Complainant failed
to establish that he was subjected to discrimination as alleged. 2 Specifically, the Agency found
that Complainant presented no evidence that he was subject to severe or pervasive harassing
conduct or that the matters raised in this complaint occurred due to his disability.

Hearing Process

On August 28, 2020, the AJ issued an Order Following Telephonic Pre-Hearing Conference
noting, in relevant part, that the Agency shall be permitted six requests for admission and four
document requests. The Order stated the parties shall propound requests within seven days.
Further, it was noted that all discovery should be completed by October 29, 2020. 3

On September 4, 2020, the Agency served its discovery, which included six Requests for
Admission and the following four Requests for Production (RFP): (1) all medical records
between March 2018 and October 2018 relating to Complainant’s disability and associated
limitations; (2) all recordings relating to the claims in this case (citing page 45 of the
Supplemental ROI); (3) legible and complete copies of email strings and documents
Complainant submitted in the supplemental ROI which were either illegible or incomplete
(numerous specific pages were listed); and (4) any documents not already provided (either
through discovery or in the ROI), that Complainant may submit, refer to, or rely on in this
matter. Complainant’s responses were due on Monday, October 5, 2020.



2
  Footnote 1 of the Agency’s final decision noted, “The record in this case includes a Report of
Investigation (ROI) and a Supplemental ROI (Supp. ROI) generated in response to a Remand
Order from the EEOC Administrative Judge, dated February 25, 2020. Complainant’s audio and
video files are also included in the record. (Supp. ROI, Tab 3-1).” We find there are no audio
and/or video files in Tab 3-1 of the Supplemental ROI provided to the Commission.
3
  The AJ issued a corrected Order on September 8, 2020; however, the Order merely corrected a
typographical error regarding the hearing date. The deadline for discovery completion remained
October 29, 2020.
                                                4                                    2021002420

On October 6, 2020, the Agency followed up with Complainant stating the Agency had not
received any documents from Complainant. Complainant was requested to provide responses as
soon as possible, but no later than Friday, October 9, 2020.

On October 9, 2020, Complainant responded stating he “thought the deadline was when
everything is due.” Complainant stated he requested the medical records but would not have
them until the next week at the earliest. He stated he would work on the questions and provide
them “ASAP.” Further, Complainant noted that some of the materials had already been
provided.

On October 14, 2020, the Agency granted Complainant a second extension until October 19,
2020, to provide the documents. The Agency noted if it did not receive Complainant’s responses
by October 19, it would need to file a Motion to Compel with the AJ in order to preserve the
Agency’s rights. The Agency also noted it would need time to review Complainant’s responses
in advance of his deposition and proposed to move his deposition to October 27, 2020.

On October 14, 2020, Complainant stated he appreciated the extension. Further, he noted that he
already requested the medical information. On October 19, 2020, at 10:13 a.m. Complainant
informed the Agency he would send the information “tonight after work.”

On October 19, 2020, at 9:35 p.m., Complainant emailed his answers to the Agency’s discovery
requests. Complainant answered all six requests for admission. Regarding the four RFP,
Complainant stated that the “information [was] provided multiple times between the span of 2.5
years (2 investigations 2 incomplete ROIs).” Complainant further stated the information “Will
be provided as exhibits during a hearing as it pertains to litigation. Missing Documents will [be]
utilized as exhibits.” Complainant stated the “Medical Information was provided multiple
time[s] but was supplied again pertaining to specific dates.”

On October 20, 2020 at 2:43 p.m., the Agency Attorney emailed Complainant with concerns
about his lack of response. The Attorney stated he was still unable to open his medical records
since it was sent via link to the Adobe Document Cloud. The Attorney stated that the Agency
blocked access to this site and that they are unable to use such cloud-based document exchange
sites. The Attorney stated Complainant was asked to send a pdf document, but his most recent
email again used a link to the Adobe Document Cloud, which could not be accessed. The
Attorney also stated Complainant did not provide any of the other documentation in response to
RFP (2), (3), or (4). The Attorney noted Complainant indicated he previously provided this
documentation; however, the Attorney stated, “a lot of what you submitted was incomplete or
illegible, so [we are] seeking legible and complete copies.” The Attorney informed Complainant
if he did not provide the requested documents before 8:00 a.m. tomorrow the Attorney would
request permission from the AJ to file a Motion to Compel.

On October 21, 2020, the Agency sought permission from the AJ to file a Motion to Compel.
The Agency noted that it initiated discovery on September 4, 2020, and when Complainant did
not answer after 30 days, it granted an extension until October 19, 2020.
                                                 5                                      2021002420

The Agency acknowledged that Complainant provided documentation in response to RFP (1),
but stated he did not provide anything in response to RFP (2), (3), or (4) and responded only that
he had provided the information multiple times in the past 2.5 years. The Agency noted it
afforded him another opportunity to provide the information; however, he did not provide it.
Thus, the Agency requested it be allowed to file a Motion to Compel. In a response filed the
same day, Complainant stated that all exhibits have been in the Agency’s possession and argued
that the requested production was redundant.

On October 21, 2020, the AJ granted the Agency permission to file the Motion to Compel. The
AJ noted Complainant would be given an opportunity to respond.

In its October 21, 2020 Agency’s Motion to Compel, the Agency noted that Complainant
provided a pdf of his medical records on October 19, 2020 addressing RFP (1). However, it
stated he failed to provide documents in response to RFP (2) - (4). The Agency stated as of
October 21, 2020, it has not received any response to RFP (2) - (4). Regarding RFP (2), the
Agency noted it made the request based on Complainant’s assertion in the Supplemental ROI
that he had relevant recordings. The Agency stated it should not be difficult or burdensome for
Complainant to identify what recordings he has made regarding his claims and provide copies.
Regarding RFP (3), the Agency claimed it was inaccurate for Complainant to assert that the
Agency was in possession of the documents requested in RFP (3). Rather, the Agency stated that
it identified the illegible and incomplete documents provided to the investigator and it is
requesting legible and complete copies of the documents, which Complainant himself asserted
are relevant. Regarding RFP (4), the Agency clarified it was not asking for anything to be
duplicated. Thus, the Agency sought an Order compelling Complainant to respond to RFP (2) -
(4).

Complainant filed a Motion to Compel Response dated October 22, 2020. 4 In his Response,
Complainant stated that during the second investigation, he provided the Agency with duplicates
of the materials provided in the initial investigation, via email. Thus, he stated there is no excuse
for the Agency to claim they are not in possession of the material. He explained that the emails
considered illegible are just duplicates of material provided in the initial investigation.
Regarding the audio files, Complainant stated that Person A (EEO Investigator) acknowledged
she was able to save the audio files; however, according to the Supplemental ROI, the files were
not saved. Complainant provided an April 23, 2020 email from Person A stating she received
the two video files with the file extension .MOV and was able to save them into a file. In the
same email, Person A stated she received all versions of Complainant’s documents and they have
been included in his file.

On October 26, 2020, the AJ found the discovery requested was “necessary with respect to
factual issues relevant to the complaint and reasonably calculated to discover material evidence.”
The AJ found Complainant did not provide good cause for refusing to provide the discovery
requested. Thus, the AJ granted the Agency’s Motion to Compel.


4
    The record shows the Motion to Compel Response was emailed to the AJ on October 26, 2020.
                                               6                                    2021002420

The AJ noted the discovery deadline was three days away, and the discovery requested was
already weeks late. The AJ Ordered Complainant to provide all outstanding discovery
documents no later than noon on October 27, 2020.

On October 27, 2020, the Agency deposed Complainant without the requested discovery
responses. In a Declaration from the Agency Attorney, the Agency Attorney stated that at his
deposition, Complainant told him that the requisite responses would be provided. The Agency
Attorney stated he told Complainant if he did not have the documentation by the following
morning, he would reach out to the AJ.

The following events described in this paragraph occurred on October 28, 2020. At 1:41 a.m.
Complainant sent a fax consisting of nine pages of emails. At 2:40 a.m. Complainant emailed
the Agency Attorney stating he was “called in” but was able to send over a few documents. He
stated he would send over the rest later that day. Then at 12:32 p.m. Complainant sent medical
records with handwritten page numbers 5-20. At 12:44 p.m. the Agency contacted Complainant
acknowledging receipt of the fax with nine pages of emails but noting several contained
incomplete email strings. The Agency acknowledged receiving some medical records but noted
other documents were requested. The Agency asked when Complainant expected to provide
everything that was ordered. At 12:59 p.m., Complainant emailed the AJ requesting an
extension. At 3:16 p.m., Complainant emailed several pdfs to the Agency. At 3:19 p.m.,
Complainant emailed the AJ and the Agency Attorney stating the audio file would be sent
momentarily and asking the Agency Attorney to advise what specifically was missing. At 3:26
p.m. the AJ noted Complainant admitted he did not comply with the AJ’s Order to file all
discovery by noon on October 27, 2020. The AJ stated, “All outstanding discovery shall be
provided to the Agency by 6:00 p.m. by today at the latest.” The AJ noted if discovery was not
provided by today, the Agency had permission to file a motion for sanctions. At 4:36 pm.
Complainant emailed the Agency a link with an audio file. The Agency Attorney responded that
he was not able to access shared drives or drop boxes, as they were not secure and noted he tried
but was unable to access the file. Complainant replied that the Agency used the same software to
provide him with files. In response the Agency Attorney stated he did not know what ORM
uses, but OGC (Office of General Counsel) does not have such access. At 5:10 p.m. the Agency
provided a detailed list of issues with documents and audio/visual files submitted by
Complainant. The Agency asked Complainant if he could attach the audio/video recording to an
email without a link. The Agency stated of the 114 pages of emails sent: 39 appeared to be
missing parts of the email string; four were missing attachments supposedly attached to the
emails; and four pages were omitted from the medical records (pages 1-4 since the medical
documents sent started with handwritten page number 5). The Agency also noted that the
documents did not appear to be in any order and that many of the pdf pages had numbers at the
bottom and asked what the numbers were. Complainant responded at 5:22 p.m. stating the
documents were “in order by dates/and time.” At 5:23 p.m. he stated that the numbers on the
documents were “proof of duplication and that they were submitted you previously.”
                                                7                                    2021002420

On October 29, 2020, the Agency filed its Agency’s Motion for Sanctions. The Agency noted
that it was seeking discovery because the email strings provided in the ROI were incomplete and
illegible. The Agency stated Complainant has now produced legible, but still incomplete email
strings. The Agency noted many responses were missing the listed attachments. The Agency
noted that the medical records provided had handwritten page numbers on them starting with
page five, but it noted that pages 1-4 were missing. Further, the Agency stated that there were
other medical records Complainant had not yet produced. Finally, the Agency noted that
Complainant has not provided his recording in response to RFP (2) in a way that is accessible to
the Agency Attorney. The Agency claimed Complainant was given multiple opportunities to
provide discovery but each time failed to produce what was requested.

On October 30, 2020, Complainant responded, “I provided the agency with everything that I
have.” He noted that, “if there are any missing emails st[r]ings [they] would only be on the
[Agency] server which I do not have access to because I no longer work there. I can continue to
make my case without the emails.”

On November 3, 2020, the AJ issued a Dismissal Order: Sanctions noting that Complainant
failed to respond to the Agency’s timely initiated discovery within 30 calendar days, as required.
The AJ acknowledged the Agency granted him extensions through October 19, 2020. The AJ
stated on October 19, 2020, Complainant refused to provide documents responsive to RFP (2) -
(4). The AJ noted that he granted the Agency’s Motion to Compel, finding Complainant failed
to demonstrate good cause for refusing to provide the relevant discovery requested and that
Complainant had been ordered to provide all outstanding documents no later than noon on
October 27, 2020. The AJ noted that on October 28, 2020, Complainant emailed him requesting
an extension, although the deadline had already passed. The AJ noted at 3:26 p.m., he responded
to Complainant’s extension request by stating, ”I ordered Complainant to file all discovery by
yesterday at noon. Now he admits he has not done so, in violation of my order. All outstanding
discovery shall be provided to the Agency by 6:00 p.m. today at the latest.” The AJ noted
Complainant produced documents and responses to discovery between 1:41 a.m. and 5:23 p.m.,
which the Agency detailed were still incomplete responses. The AJ stated the Agency was
seeking complete email strings, because the ones Complainant provided in the ROI were
incomplete and illegible. The AJ noted Complainant has now produced legible, but still
incomplete email strings. The AJ noted that according to the documentation the Agency
provided, there were 39 incomplete email strings and another 10 emails missing attachments.
Further, there were relevant medical records that Complainant intended to use that have not been
provided. Finally, the AJ stated that Complainant had not provided his recording in response to
RPF (2) in a way that was accessible to Agency counsel.

The AJ noted that in response to the Agency’s Motion for Sanctions, Complainant stated he
provided the Agency with everything he had. The AJ noted that Complainant “failed to provide
documentation that he has indeed ‘provided the [A]gency with everything I have’.” The AJ
granted the Agency’s Motion for Sanctions because despite being on notice of the requirements
to comply with the AJ’s orders and that sanctions may be imposed for his failure to comply, he
has repeatedly failed to cooperate.
                                                8                                    2021002420

The AJ noted Complainant was given multiple opportunities to provide discovery and each time
failed to produce what was requested and failed to provide a valid reason for his refusal to
comply. Thus, the AJ dismissed the request for a hearing and ordered the Agency to issue a final
decision.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

The Commission’s regulations confer upon its AJs very broad responsibility for adjudicating an
EEO complaint once a complainant’s hearing request has been granted, and that responsibility
gives the AJs wide latitude in directing the terms, conduct, or course of EEO administrative
hearings. Chere S. v. Gen. Serv. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0720180012 (Nov. 30, 2018). The
AJ’s discretionary authority includes the power to impose sanctions upon a party that fails to
comply with the AJ’s orders. Id. When the a party fails without good cause shown to respond
fully and in a timely fashion to an order of an administrative judge, or requests for the
investigative file, for documents, records, comparative data, statistics, affidavits, or the
attendance of witness(es), the administrative judge shall, in appropriate circumstances: (i) Draw
an adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony of the requested witness,
would have reflected unfavorably on the party refusing to provide the requested information; (ii)
Consider the matters to which the requested information or testimony pertains to be established
in favor of the opposing party; (iii) Exclude other evidence offered by the party failing to
produce the requested information or witness; (iv) Issue a decision fully or partially in favor of
the opposing party; or (v) Take such other actions as appropriate. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(f)(3).

Sanctions serve a dual purpose. On the one hand, they aim to deter the underlying conduct of the
non-complying party and to prevent similar misconduct in the future. Barbour v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 07A30133 (June 16, 2005). On the other hand, they are corrective and
provide equitable remedies to the opposing party. Given these dual purposes, sanctions must be
tailored to each situation by applying the least severe sanction necessary to respond to a party’s
failure to show good cause for its actions and to equitably remedy the opposing party. Royal v.
Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009). Factors pertinent to
“tailoring” a sanction, or determining whether a sanction is even warranted, include: (1) the
extent and nature of the non-compliance, including the justification presented by the non-
complying party; (2) the prejudicial effect of the non-compliance on the opposing party; (3) the
                                                 9                                     2021002420

consequences resulting from the delay in justice, if any; (4) the number of times the party has
engaged in such conduct; and (5) the effect on the integrity of the EEO process as a whole. Id.

The AJ found that the dismissal of Complainant’s hearing request was the appropriate sanction;
however, we have consistently held in our more recent decisions that the dismissal of a hearing
request as a sanction is only appropriate in extreme circumstances. One such circumstance is
when the complainant engages in contumacious conduct, not merely negligence. See Wilma B.
v. Dept. of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2020003672 (Dec. 2, 2021); Cassey B. v. Dept.
of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2019004838 (Sept. 24, 2020), request for reconsideration
denied, EEOC Request No. 2021000172 (June 9, 2021); Cecile T. v. Dept. of the Treasury,
EEOC Appeal No. 2019002373 (Sept. 22, 2020); Carolyn M. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal
No. 2019004843 (Mar. 10, 2020). Examples of contumacious conduct warranting dismissal of
hearing requests include: Charlie K. v. Dep’t of Veteran Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2019002293
(Sept. 22, 2020) (failure to provide investigative affidavit during agency investigation and failure
to provide answers to interrogatories during discovery despite being granted multiple extensions
in both phases of the proceedings, as well as failure to appear at pre-hearing conference) and
Cleo S. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120181406 (Feb. 28, 2020) (failure to
participate in email communications being sought by the agency and to produce documentation
ordered by AJ in a manner demonstrating disregard for the administrative process and
unwillingness to comply with AJ’s orders despite warning of consequences).

These recent cases demonstrate that there must be a showing that a complainant either willfully
disobeyed the AJ’s orders or unjustifiably failed to respond to those orders to justify dismissal of
the hearing request as a sanction. When a lesser sanction would normally suffice to deter the
conduct and to equitably remedy the opposing party, an AJ may be abusing his discretion by
dismissing the complaint. See Georgianne B. v. Dept. of Agric., EEOC Appeal Nos. 0120181591
& 0120181592 (Feb. 27, 2020) (dismissal of hearing request rejected on appeal where AJ
dismissed hearing request outright rather than grant agency’s motion to compel discovery or
limiting complainant’s discovery when complainant failed to appear at the initial conference and
failed to respond to a discovery request despite the fact that the parties and the AJ remained in
continuous email correspondence in an effort to litigate the case); Drucilla Y. v. Dep’t of the
Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 0120182728 (Feb. 27, 2020)(dismissal of hearing request rejected
on appeal where complainant made earnest but unsuccessful effort to comply with an onerous
acknowledgement and scheduling order), request for reconsideration denied, EEOC Request No.
2020002964 (December 29, 2020).

With the foregoing considerations in mind, we find no indication that Complainant engaged in
the kind of willful or obstinate refusal to comply with the AJ’s orders that typifies contumacious
conduct. We find this is not a situation where Complainant failed to respond at all to the
Agency’s discovery requests. Specifically, we note that when contacted by the Agency and
requested to provide an explanation by October 9, 2020, for his failure to respond to discovery
within 30 days, Complainant, who was pro se, timely responded and explained his
misunderstanding that the deadline was when everything was due. Thereafter, the Agency
granted him two extensions and provided a deadline of October 19, 2020.
                                                10                                     2021002420

We note it is undisputed that Complainant answered all six requests for admission by October
19, 2020. In addition, in its request to file a Motion to Compel and the subsequent Motion to
Compel, the Agency noted that Complainant responded on October 19, 2020, by providing pdfs
of his medical records in response to RFP (1).

Further, we note that Complainant subsequently provided over 100 pages of additional emails
and pdfs on October 28, 2020. We recognize this submission was not timely; however, we note
it was made prior to the AJ’s Order setting a 6:00 p.m. deadline on October 28, 2020, for all
outstanding discovery (and prior to the October 29, 2020 initial deadline for discovery). While
there is no dispute that the additional documents are legible, we note the AJ states the email
strings provided were still incomplete. While the AJ stated that according to the Agency’s
documentation there were 39 incomplete email strings and another 10 emails missing the
attachments, we note the AJ failed to specify whether the AJ agreed that all the cited discovery
responses were lacking or how they were specifically lacking. 5 The AJ also stated there were
relevant medical records Complainant intended to use which have not been provided, without
specifically identifying what documents those are. Finally, we note that while the AJ
acknowledged Complainant’s October 30, 2020 response that he provided the Agency with
everything he possessed, the AJ found Complainant failed to provide any documentation that he
has “provided the [A]gency with everything I have.” However, we note the AJ did not specify
what documentation Complainant could have provided to establish he provided the Agency with
everything he possessed.

Additionally, we note that most of the documents requested during discovery concerned
information Complainant provided to the investigator during the ROI and Supplemental ROI.
Specifically, the illegible and incomplete email strings requested were documents that
Complainant provided to the investigator during the Supplemental ROI. Complainant contends
that these were the same emails provided in the initial investigation and the record reveals that at
least some of the emails were provided during the initial investigation. We note there is no
indication that either of the two investigators requested legible or complete email strings during
the two investigations. Further, we note that the record reflects Complainant provided
audio/video recordings during the supplemental investigation. Specifically, evidence shows that
Complainant sent audio/video recording(s) in April 2020 to the EEO Investigator at her Agency
email address during the supplemental investigation. (Supplemental ROI 000585, 000569). The
Table of Contents for the Supplemental ROI indicates that Tab 8 included files in MOV and
PNG formats. However, we note there is no Tab 8 in the supplemental ROI provided to the
Commission. There is no indication that during the investigation Complainant was requested to
submit such evidence in another format.




5
  Upon review, we note that of the 10 responses identified as having missing attachments several
appear to be duplicates of the same email and/or attachments. For example, pages 4 and 122 are
identical emails with the same attachment missing; pages 38, 40, and 126 have the same
identified attachment missing; pages 69 and 124 have the same identified attachment missing.
                                                11                                    2021002420

Further, Tab 7-19a contains a “Memorandum Re: Video Files Note to the File” from the EEO
Investigator Team Leader noting that Complainant “submitted three video files as exhibits in
which ORM was unable to combine into the supplemental ROI. The video files will be
submitted to FEDSEP as separate items.” (Supplemental ROI 000669). However, there is no
indication these separate files were included in the Supplemental ROI provided to the
Commission.

Upon review, we find that the Agency was on notice that Complainant intended to rely on these
audio files in support of his case and did not ensure that they were made part of the Supplemental
Investigation, despite the acknowledgment that the audio files were received by the investigator
and the contention by the EEO Investigator Team Leader that the files would be submitted to
FEDSEP as separate items. Thus, we find the Agency did not have unclean hands in the
handling of the requisite audio recordings.

In the present case, we find the AJ could have crafted a less severe sanction that was specifically
tailored to address a situation where an employee’s responses to an agency’s discovery requests
were not complete. Jane S. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2021000960 (July 14, 2022)
(dismissal of hearing request rejected on appeal where complainant’s discovery responses were
not “full and sufficient)”. In the absence of a showing of either willfully disobedience or an
unjustifiable failure to respond, we cannot find that the integrity of the process has been so
compromised as to warrant the severe sanction of a hearing request dismissal. As such, we
conclude that the circumstances in this case do not justify the particular sanction imposed by the
AJ.

                                         CONCLUSION

The Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the complaint to the
Agency for further action in accordance with this decision and the Order herein.

                                             ORDER

The Agency is directed to submit a copy of the complaint file to the EEOC Hearings Unit in
Boston, Massachusetts within 15 days of the date this decision is issued. The Agency shall
provide written notification to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth herein that the
complaint file has been transmitted to the Hearings Unit. Thereafter, the Administrative Judge
shall hold a hearing and issue a decision on the complaint in accordance with 29 C.F.R.
§1614.109 and the Agency shall issue a final action in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored.
                                                12                                    2021002420

Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report
in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s
final report must contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the
Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                                 13                                     2021002420

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 14                                     2021002420

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 19, 2022
Date
