              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Irene F., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Gina M. Raimondo,
                                           Secretary,
                                    Department of Commerce
                                     (Bureau of the Census),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020004329

                                  Agency No. 63-2019-00405D

                                           DECISION

On July 26, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the
Agency’s July 14, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

Complainant applied for and was hired as a Partnership Specialist, GG-0301-11, at the Agency’s
Regional Census Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

On September 23, 2019, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint in which she alleged that the
Agency discriminated against her on the bases of race (African-American), sex (female), and in
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when Complainant’s entry-on-duty (EOD) was delayed
from August 5, 2019, to September 16, 2019, because her supervisor did not inform her until July
31, 2019, that she would be responsible for the cost of lodging for mandatory orientation training.
Complainant further alleged that “minority females are directly impacted by the Agency’s policy
of requiring unemployed persons to pay for lodging to attend mandated, government-sponsored
training.”




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2020004329

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
investigative report (IR) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. On May 5, 2020, Complainant requested a final
agency decision without a hearing. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued
its decision in which it concluded that Complainant failed prove that she was subjected to
discrimination or reprisal as alleged.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Impact

To prevail on a disparate impact claim, Complainant must ultimately prove that an agency practice
or policy, while neutral on its face, disproportionately impacted members of her protected classes,
in this case women and African-Americans. Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431 (1971).
She can do so by presenting statistical evidence sufficient to show that the practice in question has
caused the exclusion. Watson v. Fort Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U.S. 977, 994 (1988). To establish
a prima facie case of disparate impact, she must: (1) identify the specific practice or practices
challenged; (2) show statistical disparities; and (3) show that the disparity is linked to the
challenged practice or policy. The burden is on a complainant to show that “the facially neutral
standard in question affects those individuals within the protected group in a significantly
discriminatory pattern.” Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321, 329 (1977).

Here, Complainant identifies as a discriminatory practice what she characterizes as the Agency’s
policy of requiring newly hired employees to pay lodging expenses incurred during mandatory
training out-of-pocket. But according to the Partnership Coordinator and the Travel Team Lead,
the new hires would be reimbursed for any training-related travel expenses that they might incur.
IR, Ex 7, p. 2; Ex. 8, p. 2. In support of her disparate impact claim, Complainant submitted an
article entitled “The Impact of Structural Racism in Employment and Wages on Minority
Women’s Health” stating that minority females and particularly African American women have
lower income than others in the United States. Complainant, however, has not presented any
statistical evidence of an adverse impact the policy at issue has had on African-American women.
The only statistical evidence in the record is the profile of the workforce that reports to the
Partnership Coordinator. IR, Ex. 9. That evidence shows that the Partnership Coordinator
supervised a staff of 113 employees, of which 71 were women and 31 were minority women.
                                                3                                     2020004329

Thus, the record contains insufficient evidence to show that the practice identified had a
disproportionate impact on minority and women employees. Without such evidence, Complainant
is unable to show legally significant statistical disparities. Therefore, the Commission finds that
Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of disparate impact discrimination.

Disparate Treatment

We now turn to Complainant’s disparate treatment claim. To prevail, Complainant must satisfy
the three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802 (1973). Her first step would generally be to establish a prima facie
case by demonstrating that she was subjected to an adverse employment action under
circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Const. Coro. v. Waters,
438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). The prima facie inquiry may be dispensed with in this case, however,
since the Partnership Coordinator articulated a legitimate and nondiscriminatory reason for
informing Complainant that she had to cover her own travel costs. See U.S. Postal Service Bd. of
Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-17 (1983). According to the Partnership Coordinator and
the Travel Team Lead, it was the Agency’s normal practice to require newly hired employees
assigned to training to pay their own travel expenses and be reimbursed after the training. IR, Ex.
7, p. 2; Ex. 8, p. 2. The Partnership Coordinator stated that he advised all new hires on July 31,
2019, of this requirement. Additionally, the Partnership Coordinator affirmed that when
Complainant complained about the situation in an August 3, 2019 email, she specifically requested
her start date to be pushed back. The Partnership Coordinator noted that since Complainant
requested that her start date be moved, it became a matter for the Administrative Department to
address pursuant to protocol.

To ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Partnership Coordinator’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson
Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Hon. Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519
(1993); Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981). Pretext can be
demonstrated by showing such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or
contradictions in the Agency's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. Opare-Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007), req. for reconsid. den’d EEOC Request No. 0520080211
(May 30, 2008). Beyond her own assertions, Complainant has presented neither affidavits,
declarations, or unsworn statements from witnesses other than herself nor documents which
contradict or undercut the explanations provided by the Partnership Coordinator and the Travel
Team Lead, which cause us to question the truthfulness of these individuals as witnesses, or which
otherwise tend to establish an inference of a discriminatory motive attributable to the Partnership
Coordinator. As Complainant chose not to request a hearing, the Commission does not have the
benefit of an Administrative Judge's credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the
Commission can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. And from
that evidentiary record, we conclude that Complainant failed to demonstrate that she was subjected
to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.
                                                 4                                      2020004329

After a review of the record in its entirety, including consideration of all statements submitted on
appeal, it is the decision of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision because the preponderance of the evidence of record does not establish
that discrimination occurred.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   5                                      2020004329

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 8, 2021
Date
