            U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013



                                      Katherina A., 1
                                      Complainant,

                                             v.

                                  Jennifer M. Granholm,
                                         Secretary,
                                  Department of Energy,
                                          Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2021003403

                                Agency No. 19-0114-HQ-EI

                                        DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated April 22, 2021, finding no discrimination
concerning her complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the
following reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                                     BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Industrial
Economist, GS-12, at the Agency’s Office of Energy Consumption and Efficiency Analysis
(OECEA), Energy Information Administration (EIA) in Washington, D.C.

On October 11, 2019, Complainant filed her complaint alleging discrimination and harassment
based on race (Middle Eastern/Persian), color (pale yellow), sex (female), religion (Islam),
national origin (half Persian/half Indian), and in reprisal for prior EEO activity when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                   2021003403

   1. From July 24, 2019, to the date of the instant formal complaint, her supervisor (S1),
      Supervisory Operations Research Analyst, EIA, constantly criticized her work, stating
      that her work is deficient and inaccurate.

   2. From July 24, 2019, to the date of the instant formal complaint, S1 has been “spying”
      on her and micromanaging her time.

   3. On unspecified dates, S1 has set unrealistic deadlines for completion of her assignments
      but does not set such deadlines for her male colleagues. By way of background,
      Complainant asserts that S1 maintains a “Boy’s Club” with male members of the
      Industrial Team during official work hours and chats with them for hours about social
      issues. Complainant further asserts that S1 assists her male colleagues with their
      assignments “like kindergarteners,” but she produces her assignments without S1’s
      assistance.

   4. From July 24, 2019, to the date of the instant formal complaint, she repeatedly
      communicated her concerns to S1 “about his impulsiveness,” but S1 has become more
      hostile towards her and bullied her.

   5. From August 2019, to the date of the instant formal complaint, S1 “misinform[ed]
      [Complainant] about [her] projects.”

   6. On unspecified dates, S1 has “deliberately limit[ed] [Complainant’s] career
      development and growth” and has caused her not to qualify for promotions and grade
      increases.

After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency issued its
final Agency decision concluding that it asserted legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
action, which Complainant failed to rebut. The record indicates that Complainant began
working for the Agency in January 2017. S1 became her first level supervisor in June 2019.

Regarding claim 1, S1 indicated that he informed Complainant that she was required to
perform her work completely and accurately and provided directions suitable for a GS-12 level
staff member to accomplish the required tasks. S1 stated that when he tried to point out to
Complainant that she was computing aggregated shipment growth rates incorrectly, she told
him that his directions were completely unconstructive and faulty.

Regarding claim 2, S1 denied spying on Complainant. S1 stated that he instructed his staff,
including Complainant, to set their Skype as available while on duty. However, indicated S1,
there were occasions when Skype account displayed Complainant was offline or out of office,
even though she was on duty.
                                              3                                   2021003403

Regarding claim 3, S1 indicated that although Complainant claimed that he gave an employee
(E1) more time to complete a project whereas he gave her a short time for her project, E1 was
a senior analyst and was a Geologist, and not an Industrial Economist as she was. S1 denied
shortening or giving unrealistic deadlines for Complainant’s assignments. S1 stated that he
sometimes gave his staff short turn-around times on certain projects. On one occasion, stated
S1, he gave Complainant two days to complete a one-day assignment, but she failed to do so.
S1 noted that he did not socialize with any of his staff at work or during non-duty hours.

Regarding claim 4, Complainant indicated that S1 harassed and bullied her by scheduling
weekly updates and in his reply emails. S1 stated that Complainant’s accusations of hostility
were in response to his emails where he expected attendance at mandatory meetings and for
assignments to be done on time. S1 indicated that as a supervisor, he required the attendance
of his staff, including Complainant, for mandatory meetings; staff must attend or ask for
permission beforehand to be excused; and Complainant did not request permission or provide
an acceptable reason for missing the March 25, 2020 weekly meeting. Instead, stated S1,
Complainant accused him of getting hostile and bullying her.

Regarding claim 5, S1 indicated that on January 6, 2020, he asked Complainant for a status
update regarding two Critical Element #1 assignments which were overdue. Complainant then
informed S1 that she lost the data needed to do her assignment due to computer issues at which
he pointed out to her that the data was downloadable from the EIA website. S1 noted that as
of June 18, 2020, Complainant still had not completed the two Critical Element #1
assignments.

Regarding claim 6, S1 denied making any decision or having any input into Complainant’s
promotion denial from a GS-12 grade to a GS-13 grade. However, stated S1, he did deny
Complainant a within-grade-increase because she has been issued two Fails to Meet
Expectations ratings in her Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 performance evaluation and because she
continued to perform below the Meets Expectation level since then. Complainant’s FY 2019
performance evaluation is not at issue herein.

In its final decision, the Agency found that Complainant failed to demonstrate that its actions
were motivated by discrimination or that she was subjected to harassment as alleged.
Complainant appealed from the Agency’s final decision.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de
novo standard of review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to
the factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant
                                                  4                                     2021003403

submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own
assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law").

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating
that he or she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would
support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567,
576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Department of Community
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the
complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of
the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor
Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel
action at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell
Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of
the evidence that the agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal
Service Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v.
Department of Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v.
Department of Health and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990);
Washington v. Department of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive that it results in an alteration of
the conditions of a complainant’s employment. See Enforcement Guidance on Harris v.
Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002, at 3 (Mar. 8, 1994). In order to establish
a claim of harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) she belongs to the statutorily protected
classes or engaged in prior EEO activity; (2) she was subjected to unwelcome conduct related
to her membership in those classes or her prior EEO activity; (3) the harassment complained of
was based on those classes or that activity; (4) the harassment had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with her work performance and/or creating an intimidating, hostile,
or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer.
See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we
find that the Agency proffered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Upon
review, we find that Complainant has not shown that the Agency’s proffered reasons were
pretext for discrimination. As her supervisor, S1’s duties involved monitoring Complainant’s
work performance and duty hours, making sure she completed her assignments correctly and in
a timely manner, making sure she attended mandatory meetings, and not giving her a within-
                                               5                                   2021003403

grade-increase when her work performance did not justify such. We find that Complainant
failed to show that there were any similarly situated employees not in her protected groups who
were treated differently under similar circumstances. After a review of the record, we find
that Complainant failed to show that any of the Agency’s actions were motivated by
discrimination.

Regarding her claim of harassment, considering all the events, we find that Complainant failed
to show that it was related to any protected basis of discrimination. Further, the Commission
has held that routine work assignments, instructions, and admonishments do not rise to the
level of harassment because they are common workplace occurrences. See Gray v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120091101 (May 13, 2010). Unless it is reasonably
established that the common workplace occurrence was somehow abusive or offensive, and
that it was taken in order to harass Complainant on the basis of her protected class, we do not
find such common workplace occurrences as addressing performance deficiencies sufficiently
severe or pervasive to rise to the level of a hostile work environment or harassment as
Complainant alleges. See Complainant v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No.
0120130465 (Sept. 12, 2014). Here, Complainant provides no evidence that the incidents were
abusive or offensive, or taken in order to harass her based on discriminatory bases as alleged.

Based on the foregoing, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s actions
were motivated by discrimination as alleged or that she was subjected to harassment. 2

                                       CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.

                         STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)



The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish
that:


       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or


2
  The record indicates that Complainant was removed from her employment at the Agency on
January 29, 2021. This is not at issue herein. Our records indicate that the Commission, in
EEOC Petition No. 2022000814 (May 23, 2022), concurred with the Merit Systems Protection
Board’s final decision finding no discrimination regarding the January 29, 2021 removal.
                                               6                                    2021003403

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within
which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or
her request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely
filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing
period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof
of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

              COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil
action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency
head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
                                                7                                    2021003403

work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will
terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 08, 2022
Date
