             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Terrell G., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                        Louis DeJoy,
                                    Postmaster General,
                                 United States Postal Service
                                      (Southern Area),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020004972

                               Hearing No. 460-2019-00237X

                                Agency No. 4G-770-0038-19

                                         DECISION

On August 21, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
July 17, 2020, final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS in part, and REVERSES in part the Agency’s final order.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant, an African-American male who
had engaged in prior EEO activity, 2 worked as a Customer Service Supervisor, EAS-17, at the
Agency’s Windmill Station in Houston, Texas.




1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  The record indicates that Complainant had filed a prior EEO complaint under Agency No. SA-
18-HO-012 against the Area Manager. The prior EEO complaint was resolved by Settlement
Agreement dated April 30, 2018.
                                              2                                      2020004972

Complainant’s supervisor (Station Manager) stated that Complainant had requested to work from
8 a.m. to 5 p.m. As such, Complainant was not able to open the station at 3 a.m. or to close it at
10 p.m. Therefore, Complainant was assigned walking routes. Complainant’s coworkers, two
other supervisors (both African-American, females) were assigned the opening and closing
supervisor positions. As a result of the reassignments, Complainant believed that Station
Manager changed his schedule. According to Station Manager, Complainant’s schedule was not
changed. Investigative File (IF) at 211.

Sometime in September 2018, Complainant complained to management that he was subjected to
sexual harassment by Station Manager. Neither the exact date on which the complaint was made
nor how long the alleged sexual harassment lasted are included in the record. Complainant
alleged that Station Manager “made sexual jokes” about her personal life; that she volunteered
her personal information; that she was going to have an affair because her husband was not
treating her right; and that she was performing a “provocative dance gesture” on the workroom
floor. IF at 174, 282, 160-73, 288-95, 407. According to a Labor Relations Specialist, an
internal investigation was conducted from November 7, 2018 to November 9, 2018. The internal
investigation validated Complainant’s claim of sexual harassment. As a result, Station Manager
received coaching on proper relational skills and a Letter of Warning in lieu of a seven-day
suspension. In addition, she was downgraded to a lower level office. IF at 216, 286.

On October 29, 2018, after receiving notification about the allegations against her and before the
internal inquiry was conducted, Station Manager called her supervisor (Area Manager). Station
Manager also called her colleague, another management employee. According to Station
Manager, she was upset about the allegations, and the people she called were the only
individuals she felt she could talk to who knew about the issues she had been having with
Complainant's performance and attitude in the workplace. IF at 214, 217.

In November 2018, following the internal inquiry into the issues Complainant was having with
Station Manager, he requested to be moved from the Windmill Station. According to Area
Manager, Complainant had stated in written communication to management that he did not want
to work with Station Manager any longer. Area Manager asserted that Complainant was offered
the choice of the Albert Thomas or Almeda Station. Complainant chose the Albert Thomas
Station on condition that the transfer would not be permanent. Area Manager informed
Complainant that a vacancy for a supervisor position, a comparable position to the one
Complainant held, would soon open at that location; and that she would assign him to the
vacancy as soon as the job became available. Complainant refused the offer. Complainant also
later requested and was transferred to the Southmore Station. IF at 233-34, 236, 238.

On April 9, 2019, the Agency posted a vacancy announcement Job Number 70192631,
NC10293044 for the Supervisor Customer Service position at the Albert Thomas Station. There
were four other applicants for the position. Complainant applied but, on or about May 29, 2019,
he was not selected. Complainant and Selectee (African-American, female) had the same matrix
scores. Area Manager was the selecting official.
                                              3                                     2020004972

According to Area Manager, she had supervised Selectee and Complainant over the past two
years; and both of them had demonstrated leadership skills; worked at Albert Thomas Station;
and worked throughout Area 2. Although Complainant was equally qualified, Selectee was
selected for the position because Area Manager felt she was a good fit and best qualified. Using
her discretion as selecting official (there were no rules), Area Manager decided that a promotion
for Selectee was appropriate as Complainant was already a promoted supervisor and was
working at his location of choice, having previously refused the position when she had offered it
to him. IF at 238.

Following his non-selection, Complainant requested a detail assignment. On July 8, 2019,
Complainant was assigned a six-month detail position. However, two weeks later, on July 15,
2019, the Officer in Charge (OIC) recalled Complainant to his regular assignment at the
Southmore Station. The OIC stated that he had a "face to face" meeting with Complainant and
explained to Complainant the reason why he was needed back at his regular assignment.
According to the OIC, Complainant was sent back early from his detail assignment because
Complainant is a supervisor in the City of Houston, just finished a five- or six-month detail in
operations, and the OIC needed supervisors in the City. IF at 238, 269-70.

On February 23, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (African-American), sex (male), and reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when:

           1. From October 20, 2018, and ongoing, Complainant has been singled out in that he
              has been assigned walking routes;

           2. From October 20, 2018, and ongoing, Complainant’s schedule was changed;

           3. From October 20, 2018, and ongoing, the Agency failed to conduct a proper
              investigation “involving” Complainant’s harassment allegations;

           4. On October 29, 2018, Complainant discovered that information in regard to a
              sexual harassment claim he allegedly made was disclosed to other employees;

           5. On October 30, 2018, Complainant was assigned to the Albert Thomas Station;

           6. On or about May 29, 2019, Complainant was not selected for a Supervisor,
              Customer Services position at the Albert Thomas Post Office; and

           7. On July 17, 2019, Complainant was sent back from his detail assignment early.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.
                                               4                                       2020004972

When Complainant did not object, the AJ assigned to the case granted the Agency’s April 2,
2020, motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision without a hearing on July 10,
2020.

The AJ found that there was no evidence of the requisite link between the alleged harassment
and a discriminatory motivation. The AJ stated that Complainant could not establish both
hostility and motive. In fact, the AJ noted, the alleged incidents are neutral on their face with no
reference or implication to Complainant’s race or gender. The AJ also observed that the
evidence of record “clearly revealed” that management was working within their managerial
capacity in addressing Complainant’s concerns or “the situations.”

The AJ concluded that even when considering the facts in the light most favorable to
Complainant, he had provided insufficient evidence that management was motivated by
discriminatory animus. More importantly, the AJ added, Complainant’s own self-serving
statements were insufficient to sustain his burden of establishing a discriminatory hostile work
environment. The AJ did not analyze Complainant’s allegations under a disparate treatment
theory.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contests the AJ’s decision. He asserts that “genuine issue of material
fact” and credibility exist. Complainant argues that “every investigative unit found” that his
allegations of a hostile work environment were validated; and that Station Manager was censured
and demoted.

Complainant also argues that summary judgment was inappropriate when the case could only be
resolved by weighing conflicting evidence, which he summarily asserts that the AJ failed to do.
Complainant asserts that the AJ’s decision was in error, arguing that the investigative record had
not been adequately developed and credibility of witnesses “was at issue.” Complainant requests
that the case be remanded for a full and fair evidentiary hearing.

The Agency reiterates its explanations for the alleged management actions. The Agency asserts
that Complainant could not satisfy his ultimate burden of persuasion that the Agency’s
articulated reasons are a pretext for unlawful discrimination. The Agency requests that the
Commission affirm the AJ’s decision.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that
a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
                                              5                                       2020004972

see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other
words, we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and Agency’s, factual
conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment
discrimination statute was violated. See id. at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo
standard of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions
of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

AJ’s Issuance of a Decision Without a Hearing

We determine whether the AJ appropriately issued the decision without a hearing. The
Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision without a
hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P.
56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge determines no
genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards. Anderson v.
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment motion, the
judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to weighing the
evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the non-moving
party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at
255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-
moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp.,
846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a
case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
We carefully reviewed the record and find that it is adequately developed. To successfully
oppose a decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of record that are
in dispute or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute. Here, however,
Complainant has failed to establish such a dispute regarding claims 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7.
Complainant argued on appeal that the AJ failed to weigh conflicting evidence. He however
provided no evidence to buttress his argument as it concerns those four claims. Neither did he
provide specific actual facts in dispute with respect to them. Even construing any inferences
raised by the undisputed facts in favor of Complainant, a reasonable factfinder could not find in
Complainant's favor regarding claims 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7.
                                               6                                       2020004972

Disparate Treatment – Claims 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7

A claim of disparate treatment based on indirect evidence is examined under the three-part
analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For
Complainant to prevail, he or she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The
burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the Agency has
met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St.
Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of
Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC
Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep’t of Health and Human Serv., EEOC
Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Petition No.
03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Here, in claims 1 and 2, Station Manager asserted that Complainant was assigned the walking
routes because Complainant was unavailable to open or close the station; and Complainant was
the only qualified supervisor that could perform the “3999s.” (The PS Form 3999 is an internal
agency form used for conducting mail counts or walking route evaluations). The Station
Manager also asserted that Complainant’s schedule was not changed. Rather, other supervisors
were assigned duties Complainant could not perform due to his requested work hours. IF at 207-
209, 211. Complainant did not allege any specific incident that occurred as a result of this
management actions or why he believed they were discriminatory.

In claim 5, Area Manager, affirmed by the OIC, stated that Complainant was transferred at his
own request. Area Manager added that Complainant had his choice of locations. Complainant
chose Albert Thomas, and later Southmore. IF at 233-234, 236.

As for claim 6, Area Manager stated that she determined that Complainant and Selectee were
both qualified but felt Selectee was a better fit. She also felt it was appropriate to promote
Selectee since Complainant was already a promoted supervisor working at his location of choice
and had previously refused Area Manager’s offer of the position at issue. IF at 238.
                                              7                                      2020004972

In claim 7, The OIC stated that Complainant was returned to his regular duties to meet a staffing
need for supervisors in the “city.” IF at 269-270. The Agency has proffered legitimate non-
discriminatory reasons for the alleged actions. We next turn to Complainant to show that these
reasons are pretextual.

Complainant did not present any evidence to refute the Agency’s explanations for the personnel
decisions and actions alleged in claims 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7; and his assertions that management was
motivated by discrimination is uncorroborated. Neither did he show pretext. Complainant
maintained that his coworkers received more favorable treatment. IF at 126. Yet, two of the
coworkers he identified as comparators in claims 1 and 2 are within his protected race class, a
third coworker (white) was not qualified to perform Complainant’s assigned duties. For claim 7,
Complainant identified two comparators one of whom is within his protected race class, is not a
supervisor like Complainant, and reported to a different supervisor. Complainant himself stated
that the other comparator (Hispanic, female) was allowed to stay on her detail for health reasons.
There is no evidence that Complainant’s gender was the reason for any of the alleged actions
because, without more, commending Complainant for taking care of his children does not prove
gender-based discrimination (claims 1 and 2). For claim 5, Complainant had requested to be
transferred. For claim 7, supervisors were moved around to meet staffing needs. The evidence
also does not support Complainant’s reprisal allegations with respect to claims 1, 2, 5, and 7. IF
at 209.

Finally, as for claim 6, in non-selection cases such as failure to hire or to promote, Complainant
could demonstrate pretext by showing that his qualifications for the position were plainly
superior to those of the Selectee. Hung P. v. Dep't of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No.
0120141721 (Dec. 3, 2015). That is not the case here. Complainant and Selectee were equally
qualified for the position at issue. We note that agencies have broad discretion to choose among
equally qualified candidates as long as the selection is not based on unlawful considerations.
Lashawna L. v. Evtl. Prot. Agency, EEOC Appeal No. 2019000124 (Mar. 8, 2019). The
Commission cannot second-guess such personnel decisions unless there is evidence of a
discriminatory motivation on the part of the officials responsible for making those decisions.
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 259. Upon review, we find that Complainant has not shown that the
Agency’s action in claim 6 involved unlawful discrimination.

Complainant also failed to show how his sex was a factor in the alleged actions. There is no
evidence that management applied any policy, made any decision or took any actions that was
based on Complainant’s sex. The Commission’s position is that employers generally have broad
discretion to set policies and carry out personnel decisions and should not be second-guessed by
the reviewing authority, absent evidence of unlawful discriminatory motivation. See Cherilyn C.
v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 2019004869 (Nov. 17, 2020).
                                              8                                       2020004972

Sexual Harassment – Claim 3

We initially note that, with respect to claims 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7, we are precluded from finding
harassment with respect to these claims based on the findings above. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

To establish a claim of harassment a complainant must show that: (1) they belong to a statutorily
protected class; (2) they were subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on
their statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment
and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or
creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for
imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir.
1982). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the
conditions of [complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris
v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). The harasser’s conduct should be evaluated
from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim’s circumstances. Enforcement
Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994).

Complainant alleged that the Manager, a female, engaged in unwelcome conduct when she
engaged in sexually suggestive acts on the workroom floor including performing a “provocative
dance gesture.” Complainant was the only male employee present. Therefore, for the sake of
analysis, we assume, but do not find, that Complainant has established his parts 1, 2, and 3 of his
prima facie case of harassment.

However, based on Complainant’s own descriptions, we find that Complainant has not
established the fourth element of his prima facie case of harassment, namely that the harassment
affected a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment. The record includes a letter from Complainant dated August 13, 2018, in which he
recalled “an incident where [Station Manager] performed a provocative dance gesture on the
workroom floor while talking to the female supervisors and sometimes in front of the carriers.”
ROI at 162-64. Complainant indicated this one incident and provided no further details
explaining how the dance was “provocative.” Further, Complainant indicated that he found the
Station Manager’s conduct “very unprofessional.” However, the only evidence he provided of
such conduct was any the Station Manager joking that she was going to have an affair because
her husband “is not treating her right”. We note that Complainant overheard this comment
which was not directed at him. Finally, based on the totality of the events provided by
Complainant, we find that the single “dance” and an inappropriate personal comment are not
sufficient enough or pervasive enough to create a hostile work environment. 3


3
  The record indicates that Complainant informed the Agency of the Station Manager’s
inappropriate and unprofessional behavior beginning in August 2018 and again in September
2018. The Agency failed to conduct its internal inquiry until November 2018. Although the
                                               9                                        2020004972

Unlawful Retaliation – Claim 4

As a general matter, the statutory anti-retaliation provisions prohibit any adverse treatment that is
sufficient to dissuade a “reasonable person” from making or supporting a charge of
discrimination. See Burlington N. and Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006); EEOC
Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, § II(B)(3)
& n. 137 (Aug. 25, 2016). Although petty slights and trivial annoyances are not actionable,
adverse actions or threats to take adverse actions such as reprimands, negative evaluations, and
harassment are actionable. Id.

Given the importance of maintaining “unfettered access to [the] statutory remedial mechanisms”
in the anti-retaliation provisions, we have found a broad range of actions to be retaliatory. For
example, we have held that a supervisor threatening an employee by saying, “What goes around,
comes around” when discussing an EEO complaint constitutes reprisal. Vincent v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120072908 (Aug. 3, 2009), req. for recons. den., EEOC Request No.
0520090654 (Dec. 16, 2010). Actions, such as warning a complainant not to make false
accusations or risk disciplinary action may also amount to retaliation on its face. See Manuel R.
v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120142958 (Dec. 2, 2016) (declining to find retaliation
where, after a hearing, the record failed to show that the named responsible management official
warned complainant not to make false allegations or risk losing his job).

In the instant case, Complainant alleged in claim 4 that the Station Manager talked to her
supervisor and her colleague about his sexual harassment complaint against her. Upon review of
the record, we find that the Station Manager’s disclosure of Complainant’s sexual harassment
complaint against her, especially to her colleague, is direct evidence of unlawful retaliation that
could certainly be seen as reasonably likely to deter an employee from engaging in EEO activity.


Agency properly took corrective action in the form of demotion and censorship of the Station
Manager, we note that the Agency’s investigation into the matter would not constitute prompt
action as part of the Agency’s affirmative defense. See Rockymore v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120110311 (Jan. 31, 2012) (noting a month delay by management fails to meet the
requirement of a prompt investigation).

We remind the Agency that in cases involving supervisory harassment i.e. where the individual
accused of harassment has the authority to take tangible employment actions (such as hire, fire,
reassign or discipline), see Vance v. Ball State Univ., 570 U.S. 421 (June 24, 2013), where no
tangible employment action is taken, the employer may prove an affirmative defense comprised
of two elements: (1) that the employer exercised reasonable care to prevent and promptly correct
any harassing behavior; and (2) that the employee unreasonably failed to take advantage of any
preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise. See
Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742; see Faragher, 524 U.S. 775; see also Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Employer Liability for Unlawful Harassment by
Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999).
                                             10                                     2020004972


The Commission has held that disclosure of EEO activity by a supervisor or manager to
coworkers constitutes unlawful retaliation. Candi R. v. Envtl. Prot. Agency, EEOC Appeal No.
0120171394 (Sept. 14, 2018) (finding unlawful retaliation where a Regional Counsel for the
Agency sent to all regional office attorneys two emails which contained personally identifiable
and confidential information about Complainant’s prior EEO complaint); Complainant v. Dep’t
of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0120132430 (July 9, 2015) (retaliation found where a supervisor
broadcast complainant’s EEO activity in the presence of coworkers and management). Station
Manager’s only explanation is that she felt the need to talk to her supervisor and colleague
because they knew of other issues she had with Complainant. However, there is no evidence that
either Station Manager’s supervisor or the colleague had a need to know or had information
needed to resolve the claim. Therefore, we find that Complainant has shown that he was
subjected to unlawful retaliation as alleged in claim 4.

                                       CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s findings of no discrimination with
respect to claims 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7. We REVERSE the Agency’s findings of no discrimination
with respect to claims 4. We, therefore, REMAND the matter to the Agency for compliance
with the remedies specified in the ORDER herein.

                                           ORDER

The Agency shall take the following remedial actions:

          1. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
             shall complete a supplemental investigation concerning Complainant’s
             entitlement to compensatory damages based on the finding of discrimination with
             respect to claim 4 to determine the amount of compensatory damages due
             Complainant in a final decision with appeal rights to the Commission. The
             Agency shall pay this amount to Complainant within thirty (30) calendar days of
             the date of the determination of the amount of compensatory damages. If there is
             a dispute regarding the exact amount of compensatory damages, the Agency shall
             issue a check to Complainant for the undisputed amount. Complainant may
             petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for
             clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the
             address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s
             Decision.”

          2. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
             shall provide eight hours of interactive EEO training to the Station Manager and
             other management officials at the Agency.
                                               11                                      2020004972

           3. The required training shall address management’s responsibilities with regard to
              eliminating reprisal in the workplace. If the Station Manager has left the
              Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of the departure date.

           4. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
              shall consider taking disciplinary action against the Station Manager with respect
              to our finding regarding claim 4. The Commission does not consider training to be
              a disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the Commission and
              specify what, if any, action was taken. If the Agency decides not to take
              disciplinary action, then it shall set forth the reasons for its decision not to impose
              discipline. If Station Manager has left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall
              furnish documentation of the departure date.

           5. The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the paragraph entitled,
              “Posting Order.”

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision." The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at the Windmill Station in Houston, Texas, copies of the attached
notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency’s duly authorized representative,
shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar
days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in
conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted. The
Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered
by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as
directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission’s Decision," within 10
calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format and
must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                  ATTORNEY'S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.
                                              12                                      2020004972

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition.
                                              13                                    2020004972

See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                              14                                     2020004972

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 25, 2022
Date
