             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Zoe P., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Thomas J. Vilsack,
                                           Secretary,
                                  Department of Agriculture
                            (Office of the Chief Financial Officer),
                                            Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2021004126

                               Agency No. OCFO-2021-00056

                                          DECISION

On July 13, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 16, 2021, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Supervisory Fiscal
Technician/Financial Supervisor, GS-0503-9, at the Agency’s Office of the Chief Financial
Officer (OCFO), National Finance Center (NFC), Government Employees Services Division
(GESD), Personnel Payroll Operations (PPO), located in New Orleans, Louisiana. During the
relevant time, the Supervisory Program Analyst (S1) was Complainant’s first level supervisor.

On December 21, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2021004126

       On November 3, 2020, management issued Complainant a Fully Successful performance
       rating for her Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Performance Evaluation.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Assuming Complainant established a prima facie case of retaliation, we find that she failed to
show that the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for her rating was a pretext for
discrimination. S1 stated that she rated Complainant “Fully Successful” in her FY 2020
performance review because Complainant was slow responding to emails and phone calls and
because Complainant’s conduct was unprofessional. S1 stated Complainant had difficulty
getting along with coworkers, S1, and other areas of NFC. We find no persuasive evidence of
pretext or retaliatory animus by the Agency. Upon review, the Commission finds that
Complainant did not prove that she was subjected to retaliation as alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                3                                     2021004126

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                4                                    2021004126

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 20, 2022
Date
