             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Operations
                                 P.O. Box 77960
                            Washington, DC 20013


                                           Rose J., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                       (Southern Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021000786

                                  Agency No. 4G-770-0263-19

                                           DECISION

On November 11, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s October 21, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

Complainant worked as a City Letter Carrier, 01-E, at University Station in Houston, Texas.
On November 22, 2019, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the bases of disability (residual
effects of knee injury sustained on the job; post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)) and in reprisal
for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1. On February 11, March 11, and April 8, 2019, the Customer Service Operations
          Manager (CSOM) denied Complainant’s repeated requests for upward mobility/
          promotion;

       2. On unspecified dates in February, March, and April 2019, CSOM constantly told
          Complainant that she would not be promoted until she was off limited duty;



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2021000786

       3. On multiple occasions throughout February 2019, CSOM made inappropriate
          comments about not promoting employees on limited duty and told Complainant to
          stop thinking about being promoted;

       4. On unspecified dates between February and June 2019, CSOM called Complainant
          after work hours yelling at her and requesting work-related information;

       5. On unspecified dates, CSOM called Complainant during her sessions with an
          Employee Assistance Program (EAP) counselor and told Complainant that she could
          not make her own EAP appointments;

       6. On an unspecified date in June 2019, CSOM moved Complainant out of her
          assignment and required her to sit in the back of the post office;

       7. On unspecified dates in July 2019, CSOM and a Customer Services Manager (CSM1)
          moved Complainant to different facilities and harassed her by telling the managers at
          those facilities not to let her detail into an acting supervisor (204-B) position;

       8. On an unspecified date, Complainant was sent back to Area 6 (CSOM’s area) and not
          allowed to assist with any administrative duties;

       9. Since July 2019, the Postmaster (PM) instructed Complainant to contact a Human
          Resources Manager (HRM) to request a reasonable accommodation;

       10. On January 23, 2020, a second Customer Services Manager (CSM2), at the behest of
           CSOM, revoked Complainant’s access to Microsoft Outlook and told Complainant
           that she could no longer work the Customer 360 customer service function; and

       11. On an unspecified date in February 2020, a Customer Services Support Supervisor
           (CSSS) informed Complaint that her delivery route would be taken away since she
           could not carry.

At the conclusion of the ensuing investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of
the investigative report (IR) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. On August 24, 2020, Complainant
requested a final agency decision. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued
a decision in which it found that Complainant had not been subjected to discrimination or reprisal
as alleged. This appeal followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
                                                3                                    2021000786

C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard
of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

Hostile Work Environment

To establish a claim of discriminatory or retaliatory harassment, Complainant must show that:
(1) she belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form
of unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on her statutorily protected classes; (4) the harassment affected a term
or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment;
and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee,
682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant's] employment and create an abusive working
environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

We note that the antidiscrimination statutes are not civility codes. Rather, they forbid “only
behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim's employment.” Oncale
v. Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998). Therefore, to prove her harassment
claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or
so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's position would have found the conduct
to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was taken because of her
protected classes. Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements, hostility and motive,
will the question of Agency liability present itself.

As Complainant chose not to request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the Commission
can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. In this case, we find
that the totality of the alleged conduct was not sufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a
hostile work environment. Even assuming that the alleged conduct was sufficiently severe or
pervasive to create a hostile work environment, the Commission finds that Complainant failed
to show that the Agency's actions were based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Rather,
the evidentiary record reflects that the alleged incidents were more likely the result of routine
supervision, managerial discipline, and general workplace disputes and tribulations. For
example, as for incidents (1), (2) and (3), CSOM and other management officials averred that
the customer services managers under CSOM had the discretion as to who they would promote
and that, although she was well qualified for positions that she had bid on, other candidates had
more extensive experience and qualifications. CSOM denied that Complainant’s medical
condition played a role in her not receiving promotional opportunities. PM noted that detail
                                                4                                     2021000786

opportunities were not as plentiful because many were eliminated when the new District Manager
arrived. IR 192-95, 208, 230-21, 236-38, 243, 247.

As to incidents (4) and (5), CSOM affirmed that he did not call her after work hours or during
her EAP sessions, that management did not need to approve employee EAP appointments, and
that Complainant would often schedule her EAP appointments during work hours without
notifying anyone that she would be out of the office. IR 196-98, 243.

Concerning incidents (6), (7), and (8), CSOM averred that Complainant’s immediate supervisors
made decisions on where to assign Complainant based upon the medical documentation that she
submitted, and that he did not tell his subordinate supervisors and managers not to let
Complainant act as a 204-B supervisor unless in doing so, she would exceed her medical
restrictions. IR 198-201, 209, 254. One of the customer service managers under CSOM averred
that Complainant was moved to a particular location because she herself had requested to be
moved. IR 244.

With respect to incident (10), PM and one of Complainant’s managers explained that
Complainant’s access to Outlook was revoked because Complainant was no longer assigned to
work Customer 360. Further, there was an informal rule against non-EAS employees having
access to the Customer 360 customer service function as only management was in a position to
resolve customer complaints. IR 222, 224, 259, 263.

With regard to incident (11), CSSS affirmed that Complainant successfully bid on a carrier
position, but failed to provide the requested documentation indicating that she could perform the
duties of the position. As a result, the position was reassigned. IR 294-96, 300-01, 304-06,
310.

Moreover, to the extent Complainant claims that she was subjected to disparate treatment, the
Commission finds that Complainant has not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the
Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination or reprisal. Accordingly, we
find that Complainant has not shown that she was subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a
hostile work environment.

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

Under the Commission's regulations, a federal agency may not discriminate against a qualified
individual on the basis of disability and is required to make reasonable accommodations to the
known physical and mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability unless
the Agency can show that reasonable accommodation would cause an undue hardship. See 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(o), (p). To establish that she was denied a reasonable accommodation,
Complainant must show that: (1) she is an individual with a disability, as defined by 29 C.F.R.
§ 1630.2(g); (2) she is a “qualified” individual with a disability pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation.
See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under
                                                5                                    2021000786

the Americans with Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (“Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation”). An individual with a disability is ““qualified” if he
or she satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements of
the employment position that the individual holds or desires and, with or
without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position. 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).

Here, Complainant stated that she had a permanent injury to her left knee. As a result,
Complainant could not stand comfortably for any prolonged period of time, needed two
consecutive days off, could not drive a Postal truck, could not lift more than 10 pounds, and
could not walk on uneven surfaces. In addition, Complainant experiences complications from
PTSD. Complainant acknowledged that she was provided limited duty assignments at various
stations in Area 6 including counting mail, covering routes, entering data, calling managers and
checking her manager’s email, keeping up to date with suspenses and discipline, going to
accident sites and other clerical work. PM affirmed that Complainant had been given a suitable
job offer by virtue of being in limited duty status and that he had advised Complainant to contact
the human resources office if she had questions, since they were the experts. A Human
Resources Manager stated that he could not recall Complainant requesting a reasonable
accommodation but noted that he had spoken with Complainant several times and that by virtue
of being in limited duty status, Complainant had been provided with limited duty assignments
and was therefore being accommodated. IR 283-84, 286-91. Complainant has presented no
evidence demonstrating that the provided accommodations were ineffective. We note that the
Rehabilitation Act does not require an agency to promote an employee as a reasonable
accommodation. See Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation. As a result, the
Commission finds that Complainant has not demonstrated that the Agency denied her reasonable
accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

After a review of the record in its entirety, including consideration of all statements submitted
on appeal, it is the decision of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision because the preponderance of the evidence of record does not establish
that discrimination occurred.


                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                6                                     2021000786

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or
her request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof
of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


              COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                7                                    2021000786

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                             Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 08, 2022
Date
