             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Leona B., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                  (Field Areas and Regions),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021002203

                                 Agency No. 4C-170-0091-20

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s January 21, 2021 final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq., and Title II of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination
Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C. § 2000ff et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Sales and
Services/Distribution Associate, P-06, at the Agency’s Whitehall Post Office in Whitehall,
Pennsylvania.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2021002203

On July 21, 2020 (and subsequently amended), Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint
alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of race (African-American),
color (Black), disability (mental), age (50), genetic information 2, and in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:

       1.     On May 15, 2020, she was issued a Letter of Separation; and

       2.     In early September 2020, she became aware that management had held one of her
              paychecks for four months before notifying her that she could come to the office
              to pick it up.

Claim 1 – Separation

Complainant entered duty as a Postal Support Employee (PSE) Sales and Services/Distribution
Associate (SSDA) on March 28, 2020, subject to a probationary period. Complainant reported to
the regular Postmaster for the Whitehall facility (S3), who went out on sick leave in April 2020.
After S3 left, the Postmaster from the Emmaus Post Office took over. The Postmaster of the
Emmaus Post Office (S1) stated he was the Officer in Charge at the Whitehall Post Office from
about April 28, 2020 through July 31, 2020. He was the deciding official on the separation at
issue.

Upon entering duty, Complainant was sent to window training for a week to provide her the
basic skills and knowledge to perform the duties of her position. Complainant was told by S1
that she was being scheduled to take the test to become an 814 Clerk (Windows). She did not
pass the test. The Learning Diversity and Development Specialist averred she administered the
Exam 421, which she said was required for the PSE SSDAs to retain their position. A PSE
SSDA who fails the exam is deemed not qualified for the position and is separated.

On May 15, 2020, S1 issued Complainant a Letter of Separation “effective immediately.” The
Letter of Separation stated that Complainant’s “failure to pass the required window examination
rendered [Complainant] ineligible for the position as a PSE SSDA.”

Complainant identified three comparators whom she said failed the test, but the Agency
permitted them to remain employed. The record shows those individuals were told they were
“ineligible” and resigned or were terminated, and then reapplied and passed the test.


2
  We note that Complainant claimed that when she met with the EEO Specialist, she described
her disability as a “handicap placard.” When the EEO Specialist asked for more specificity,
Complainant stated that she then “stuttered and said anything off the top of my head.” In her
report, the EEO Specialist indicated the disability (Bi-polar disorder) and genetic information
(HIV/AIDS) Complainant provided. Complainant later claimed she only provided an example of
disabilities and she never intended the conditions she named to be included in her EEO
paperwork. Complainant states that her actual medical condition is chronic, personal, and that
she does not need to disclose it.
                                               3                                    2021002203

Some of the comparators are of the same race, color and similar in age to Complainant. One was
older than Complainant.

After she failed the test, Complainant stated that she was told by a supervisor that he could not
put her back on the schedule, because S1 said “they don’t need an 814 clerk (processing), only
an 813 (window).”

Complainant averred that she felt she was always being singled out. She said she did not have
access to the computer and did not complete the training that was needed to complete the test.
Because management averred she failed the test, she was deemed ineligible to continue her
employment. She believed it was a “set-up,” because she believed she passed the test and
because she “had an EEO case.”

Claim 2 – Delay in Receipt of Checks

Complainant claimed that she received three “outdated” checks in September 2020 that had been
held four months without notifying her. S3 averred he did not notice the checks in the drawer for
Complainant. When he did, he checked with the finance office to ensure they were valid. Once
S3 learned they were valid, he informed Complainant that she could pick up the checks. The
Agency attributed the delay to an oversight.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination or reprisal as
alleged. The instant appeal followed. In addition, Complainant appears to be raising new claims
of discrimination for the first time on appeal. 3

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).


3
  To the extent that Complainant wishes to raise any new issues that occurred subsequent to the
instant complaint, she should contact an EEO Counselor to raise those issues.
                                                4                                     2021002203

Genetic Information Claim

As an initial matter, we note that Complainant alleged discrimination based on genetic
information in violation of Title II of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008
(GINA), 42 U.S.C. § 2000ff et seq., which prohibits employers from discriminating against any
employee because of genetic information with respect to the employee. 29 C.F.R. § 1635.1.
Genetic information means information about (i) an individual's genetic tests; (ii) the genetic
tests of that individual's family members; and (iii) the manifestation of a disease or disorder in
family members of such individual (family medical history). 29 C.F.R. § 1635.3(c). During the
investigation, Complainant did not specify what genetic information she believes was used to
discriminate against her. Complainant only claimed that management was aware of her “health
information.” In addition, as noted above, Complainant claimed that the EEO Specialist
erroneously included medical information in the record that she never intended to include. There
is no evidence that management was in possession or had any knowledge of any genetic
information for anyone in Complainant’s family.

The Commission finds that Complainant's complaint is devoid of any allegations or facts
regarding genetic tests, the genetic tests of her family members, or her family medical history. In
the absence of contradicting evidence, we find that to the extent that the Agency had any
knowledge or awareness of Complainant's genetic information, Complainant has not met her
burden of proof to show that such information played a role in any of the incidents at issue
herein.

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is usually examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated
in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, he or
she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited
consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for its actions. See Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products,
Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993);
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

We will assume arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and
reprisal. In this case, however, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
its actions. Complainant entered duty As a Postal Support Employee (PSE) Sales and
Services/Distribution Associate (SSDA) Complainant was required to pass the test to become an
814 Clerk (Windows). She did not pass the test and was separated accordingly. Regarding the
delay in payment of the checks, the delay was attributed to an oversight, which was corrected by
management when the delay was discovered by S3.
                                                5                                    2021002203

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency's stated reasons are merely a
pretext for discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6,
1996). Complainant can do this directly by showing that the Agency's proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

In the absence of evidence of unlawful discrimination, the Commission will not second guess the
Agency's managerial decisions. Tx. Dept. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 259. It is not
the function of this Commission to substitute its judgment for that of management officials who
are familiar with the needs of their facility, and who are in a better position to make decisions,
unless other facts suggest that proscribed considerations of bias entered the decision-making
process. See Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996), citing
Bauer, 647 F.2d at 1048; see also Allen v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01A52639
(Aug. 10, 2005) (personnel decisions and should not be second-guessed by the reviewing
authority absent evidence of unlawful motivation).

As Complainant did not request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's final credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the
Commission can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. The
Commission finds no persuasive evidence that Complainant's protected classes were a factor in
any of the Agency's actions. At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency's reasons were not the real
reasons and that the Agency acted on the basis of discriminatory or retaliatory animus.
Complainant failed to carry this burden. As a result, the Commission finds that Complainant has
not established that she was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration.
                                                6                                     2021002203

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission.
                                                 7                                      2021002203

The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not
alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right
to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 11, 2022
Date
