              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Vernita L., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                     Denis R. McDonough,
                                           Secretary,
                                 Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                            Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2020002609

                               Agency No. 200J-0583-2019103300

                                            DECISION

On March 3, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the
Agency’s February 4, 2020 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                       ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment and discrimination based on her
protected classes and in reprisal for her protected EEO activity.

                                         BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Registered Nurse, in
Patient Care Services and Surgery at the Agency’s medical facility in Indianapolis, Indiana.

On July 19, 2019, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her
to a hostile work environment and discriminated against her on the bases of national origin
(Hispanic), 2 sex (female, sexual orientation), 3 and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                     2020002609

    1. from April 2, 2019 until June 20, 2019, Complainant was forced to take leave;

    2. on June 20, 2019, Complainant was constructively discharged from her position as a
       Registered Nurse; and

    3. Complainant was subjected to harassment when:

           a. since 2014, coworkers have made sexual, gender, sexual orientation, and race-
              based comments about her;

           b. from April 2, 2019 until June 20, 2019, Complainant was forced to take leave;

           c. on April 30, 2019, Complainant was temporarily detailed and denied telework;

           d. on June 10, 2019, coworkers openly discussed her EEO complaint and
              Complainant was restricted from reporting it;

           e. since June 14, 2019, coworkers “shunned” and ignored her, as well as convinced
              new employees to avoid her;

           f. on June 18, 2019, Complainant’s renewed complaints to management were
              dismissed; and

           g. on June 20, 2019, Complainant was constructively discharged from her position
              as a Registered Nurse.

The Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. The investigative record reflects the
following pertinent matters relating to the subject claims.

Complainant named the following as the responsible management officials (RMO): her first line
supervisor, the Operating Room Nurse Manager (RMO1) (Caucasian, female, engaged in prior
EEO activity) and her second line supervisor, the Chief of Patient Care Services Surgery Nurse
IV (RMO2) (Caucasian, female, engaged in prior EEO activity).



2
  To the extent that Complainant is claiming “Hispanic” as a race, the Commission has
consistently held that “Hispanic” is not a race category or racial classification. See Salais v. Dep't
of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120082383 (Sept. 22, 2008).
3
  In Bostock v. Clayton Cty., the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual
orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590 U.S. ___, 140 S. Ct. 1731
(2020); see also Baldwin v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC Appeal No. 0120133080 (July 15, 2015) (an
allegation of discrimination based on sexual orientation states a claim of sex discrimination
under Title VII because sexual orientation is inherently a sex-based consideration).
                                               3                                    2020002609

Since 2012, 4 Complainant asserted that her coworkers have made sexual, gender, sexual-
orientation, and race-based comments about her. Complainant asserted that in April 2012, she
complained of a coworker (CW1) to RMO1 but that nothing was done. However, during the
investigation, Complainant acknowledged only reporting two incidents of harassment and not
previously reporting the alleged 2012 incidents. The reported incidents occurred between
February and April of 2019.

On or about April 16, 2019, Complainant asserted that she informed RMO1 that coworkers had
made harassing comments towards her. RMO1 notified RMO2 of the situation. RMO1 informed
Complainant to reach out to the EEO office and requested details of the verbal assault so that an
internal fact-finding could be initiated. RMO1 asserted that Complainant denied her help and
said she wanted to handle the situation herself. Complainant also initially refused to identify
what was said or by whom.

RMO2 directed RMO1 to conduct a fact-finding. However, when Complainant refused help,
RMO2 completed a Report of Contact and notified the EEO Office, Human Resources, and her
chain of command that Complainant had alleged harassment by her coworkers but would not
share what was said or by whom. RMO2 noted that prior to this report, Complainant had not
submitted other allegations of harassment.

On May 1, 2019, RMO2 temporarily detailed Complainant while a fact-finding investigation was
conducted. RMO2 learned that Complainant’s allegations concerned an anesthesiologist and at
least two nurses. The Agency determined that it was not feasible to reassign multiple employees
from the Surgery Service. Accordingly, RMO2 temporarily detailed Complainant while the
investigation was conducted. At no point was Complainant forced to take any leave. When
Complainant was informed of the temporary detail, she requested to telework. RMO2 looked
into a potential telework position but given Complainant’s position as a Registered Nurse,
management did not have any possible telework assignments.

On May 17, 2019, the fact-finding investigation was initiated. The report stated that there were
three main incidents. In the first, Complainant asserted that on April 2 – 5, and 9 - 11, 2019, a
female coworker (CW2) made statements such as: “Have you had a dick lately; what did you
bring for lunch, a dick; and eat a dick.” Complainant asserted that there were at least two other
female witnesses present during an April 11, 2019 incident. The witnesses denied having seen
CW2 making such comments directly at Complainant. Both witnesses and CW2 asserted that the
Operating Room teams did often engage in crude jokes and lewd gestures, but that it was in good
nature. The witnesses noted that Complainant often joked that she should obtain compensation
by reporting the jokes as sexual harassment. The witnesses stated that Complainant began
making the jokes after the facility underwent a sexual harassment training about a year earlier.




4
  The claims state 2014, but in the record, Complainant asserted that she made complaints
starting in 2012.
                                               4                                   2020002609

In a second incident, Complainant asserted that sometime in March 2019, a staff anesthesiologist
(CW3) told her to “set the oxygen to 10 because you’re a 10 to me,” and “I missed you, did you
miss me.” Complainant asserted that a witness was present. Both the witness and CW3 denied
the incident and could not recall who Complainant was. CW3 asserted that he has never engaged
in any sexual activity or sexual commentary with any Agency employee.

Complainant alleged a third incident but did not describe when it occurred and only noted that
housekeepers had made inappropriate comments at her. During the fact-finding, Complainant
dropped the third incident.

On May 30, 2019, RMO1 provided Complainant with the results of the investigation. Based on
the investigation, the fact-finding team concluded that Complainant’s allegations of workplace
and sexual harassment were not substantiated.

On June 10, 2019, Complainant asserted that she learned of coworkers who were openly
discussing her EEO complaint. Complainant stated that she was restricted from reporting it.
RMO1 explained that she was informed by a subordinate employee that on June 10, 2019, an
employee witnessed another nurse discussing Complainant’s situation in the Operating Room
lounge. RMO immediately investigated the allegation and determined that there was a single
non-supervisory employee who had initiated a conversation regarding Complainant’s
circumstances, stating her belief that Complainant would be unhappy with the results. RMO1
explained that she verbally counseled the employee and ordered that employee to refrain from
engaging in such behavior in the future. RMO1 asserted that she took quick and appropriate
remedial action to ensure no further such behavior occurred.

Complainant alleges that since June 14, 2019, Complainant’s coworkers “shunned” and ignored
her, and then convinced new employees to avoid her. Complainant did not provide any evidence
of specific instances to support her allegation. On June 18, 2019, Complainant asserted that her
renewed complaints to management were dismissed. RMO1 asserted that Complainant made no
new reports and she did not witness any such behavior. RMO2 was on scheduled annual leave in
June 2019.

On June 20, 2019, Complainant asserted that she was constructively discharged from her
position as a Registered Nurse. RMO1 was on annual leave when she found out about
Complainant’s resignation. RMO1 asserted that she was surprised and disappointed to learn of
Complainant’s departure because she was an excellent nurse and hard worker. RMO2 asserted
that no one forced Complainant to resign and that she was not subject to any adverse working
conditions. RMO2 noted that the facility is a fast-paced environment but in no way hostile.
RMO2 attempted to address Complainant’s concerns and was frustrated that the situation could
not be resolved.
                                                5                                     2020002609

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant did not provide any appellate arguments. 5

The Agency asserted that Complainant failed to provide any persuasive appellate arguments for
overturning the FAD. The Agency provided a detailed appellate brief that essentially reiterated
the FAD. The Agency requested the Commission to affirm the Agency’s decision.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Disparate Treatment – Claims 1, 3(b) and (c)

Complainant alleges that she was subjected to disparate treatment. A claim of disparate
treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, she must first establish a prima
facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an
inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse
employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters,
438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate
responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency
acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we find
that the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. In claims 1,
3(b) and 3(c), Complainant alleged that she was forced to take leave, temporarily detailed; and
denied telework. The record does not indicate that Complainant was forced to take leave as she
alleged. The Agency had temporarily detailed Complainant pending an investigation into
Complainant’s harassment complaint.



5
  We note that upon receipt of the Report of Investigation (ROI), Complainant mistakenly
believed that she had received a copy of the Final Agency Decision (FAD). In this belief, she
corresponded with the Agency’s EEO office to contest details in the ROI. However, she did not
submit any appellate statements upon filing her current appeal.
                                                6                                    2020002609

The Agency indicated that although Complainant was not very forthcoming with information,
RMO2 learned that Complainant’s allegations concerned an anesthesiologist and at least two
nurses. The Agency determined that it was not feasible to reassign multiple employees from the
Surgery Service pending the investigation. Accordingly, RMO2 temporarily detailed
Complainant while the investigation was conducted. There is no evidence that Complainant was
required to take leave as she alleged. When Complainant was informed of the temporary detail,
she requested to telework. However, when RMO2 looked into a potential telework position,
given Complainant’s position as a Registered Nurse in the Surgical Services, management did
not have any possible telework assignments. Therefore, we find that the Agency provided
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its action.

Complainant has failed to show that reasons provided by the Agency, regarding the reassignment
and decision to deny telework assignment, were pretextual. Therefore, we find that Complainant
has not established that these actions constituted discrimination.

Hostile Work Environment

Complainant also alleged that she was subjected to unlawful harassment. A harassment claim is
examined under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21
(1993). See also Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems. Inc., EEOC Notice No.
915.002 (Mar. 8, 1994). To establish this claim, a complainant must show that: (1) she belongs
to a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome
conduct; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her statutorily protected class; (4) the
harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability.

The Supreme Court in Harris explained that an “objectively hostile or abusive work environment
[is created when] a reasonable person would find [it] hostile or abusive” and the complainant
subjectively perceives it as such. Harris, 510 U.S. at 21-22. Whether the harassment is
sufficiently severe to trigger a violation must be determined by looking at all the circumstances,
including “the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically
threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes
with an employee's work performance.” Id. at 23. A hostile work environment exists when the
workplace is permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult that is sufficiently
severe or pervasive to alter the condition of the complainant's employment. See Harris, supra;
see also Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 78 (1998).

Complainant has demonstrated that she belongs to statutorily protected classes based on her
national origin, sex, and prior protected EEO activity and that she was subjected to unwelcome
conduct. Complainant asserted that the staff anesthesiologist (CW3) and a nurse (CW2) had
discriminatorily made comments based on her statutorily protected classes of sex and sexual
orientation in claim 3(a).
                                                7                                     2020002609

She further asserted that coworkers openly discussed her EEO complaint and shunned her based
on her protected EEO activity, and management failed to take action when she complained as
alleged in claims 3(d), (e), and (f). Therefore, we must determine whether the harassment
alleged affected a term or condition of her employment and/or had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive work environment.

In support of claim 3(a), Complainant described two events. 6 Complainant asserted that in April
2019, CW2 made statements such as: “Have you had a dick lately; what did you bring for lunch,
a dick; and eat a dick.” However, CW2 denied making the comments and purported witnesses
did not support Complainant’s claim. In addition, Complainant claimed that sometime in March
2019, CW3 told her to “set the oxygen to 10 because you’re a 10 to me,” and “I missed you, did
you miss me.” Again, CW3 denied making any such statement and Complainant’s purported
witness had no knowledge of such events. Therefore, based on the instant record, we find that
Complainant has not substantiated her claim that she was subjected to harassment based on her
sex or sexual orientation.

In claims 3 (d), (e), and (f), Complainant alleged that she was subjected to retaliatory harassment
when management chose to do nothing when her coworkers openly discussed her EEO
complaint; her coworkers shunned her; and her new complaints were dismissed by RMO1 and
RMO2. Here, the record demonstrates that a coworker was overheard making the statement that
Complainant was going to be unhappy with the results of the internal fact-finding. However, as
soon as RMO1 was made aware of this incident, she immediately verbally counseled the
employee. There is no indication that Complainant was restricted from reporting the incident or
discouraged from doing so. The record shows that the incident was quickly handled by RMO1.
In terms of Complainant’s coworkers shunning her and advising new employees to avoid her, the
record is devoid of any evidence to support this contention. Additionally, despite Complainant’s
contention that new complaints were dismissed by RMO1 and RMO2, there is no evidence in the
record to support claim 3(f).

Constructive Discharge – Claims 2 and 3(g)

With regard to Complainant's claim asserting a discriminatory constructive discharge, she must
prove that the Agency, motivated by discriminatory animus, created working conditions that
were so difficult, unpleasant, or intolerable that a reasonable person in Complainant's position
would feel compelled to resign. Doe v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 01A114791 (Feb.
21, 2003).



6
  In this matter, the record demonstrated that Complainant’s allegations of sexual and non-sexual
harassment only stemmed from 2019. While Complainant previously asserted that she made
complaints going back to 2012, Complainant acknowledged during the investigation that she
only reported two incidents in 2019. A third incident was dropped during the May 2019 fact-
finding investigation.
                                                  8                                 2020002609

Specifically, Complainant must show that: (1) a reasonable person in her/his position would have
found the working conditions intolerable; (2) conduct which constituted prohibited
discriminatory treatment created the intolerable working conditions; and (3) complainant's
involuntary resignation resulted from the intolerable working conditions. Greer v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal Nos. 01976756, 01976792 (Dec. 29, 2000). Here, Complainant asserted
that she was subjected to ongoing harassment by her coworkers and that management did
nothing. However, the record demonstrates that Complainant had only brought the allegations of
harassment forward on two occasions, that occurred in 2019, and that the incidents were
investigated during an internal fact-finding. The investigation determined that Complainant’s
allegations were unsubstantiated. Based on the record, we find that Complainant failed to
establish that she was subjected to such intolerable working conditions that she was forced to
resign.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination
and or harassment.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                                9                                     2020002609

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 10                                     2020002609

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 21, 2021
Date
