             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                         Irene R., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                             v.

                                   Gina M. Raimondo,
                                        Secretary,
                                 Department of Commerce,
                                         Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2022003180

                                 Agency No. 63-2021-00489

                                        DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated April 18, 2020, finding no discrimination
concerning her complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following
reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Contract
Specialist/Contracting Officer, GS-13, with the Agency’s Acquisition Division in Suitland,
Maryland.

On September 23, 2021, Complainant filed her complaint alleging discrimination based on race
(African American) when:

    1. Despite her application for the position of Supervisory Procurement Analyst, GS-1102-
       14, as advertised under Vacancy Announcement Number ACQ-2021-0054, she was not
       selected.
    2. She has been denied permission to explore a detail in another division.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022003180

After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency issued its
final Agency decision concluding that Complainant’s EEO Counselor contact for claim 2 was
untimely and it asserted a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its action in claim 1.

Regarding claim 1, the Selection Official (SO), the Acquisition Assistant Division Chief,
indicated that she worked with Human Resources Division (HRD) to announce the GS-14,
Supervisory Procurement Analyst, also known as the Systems Branch Chief position, at issue,
through the competitive hiring process using a Direct Hire Authority. The announcement
indicated that applicants would be evaluated for the vacancy based on how well they meet the
position qualifications. It also indicated that under the provisions of the Direct Hire Authority,
rating, ranking, and veterans’ preference would not apply and further, applicants’ responses to
the application questionnaire would not be used to determine a scored rating.

The SO indicated that HRD provided her with the certificate of eligibles. After she reviewed
eligible candidates’ application materials, the SO decided to invite five candidates, including
Complainant, for interviews. One candidate declined to interview, and four candidates were
ultimately interviewed. The record indicates that after Complainant was invited to an interview,
she initially declined an interview and withdrew her application on August 12, 2021. Later,
Complainant decided to be interviewed, and on August 17, 2021, she was interviewed.

There were three interview panelists, including the SO. The panel was looking for someone with
acquisition experience, system/information technology knowledge, and managerial expertise to
fill the position at issue. The panelists asked candidates the same 14 work-related questions.
After the interviews, the panelists discussed their rankings of the candidates based on their
responses to interview questions and their experience set forth in their resumes. The panelists
unanimously ranked a Selectee, who was a GG-14, Branch Chief, Supervisory Program Analyst,
in Paper Processing Branch, Decennial Census Management Division, as the top candidate and
ranked Complainant second (tied with another candidate). The SO selected the Selectee for the
position.

The panelists indicated that the Selectee performed duties in Acquisition Division; she worked
with the Office of the Chief Information Office; she had experience performing operational
contract functions at the state level and providing acquisition support as a contractor to other
federal agencies; she had experience working with very large information technology
procurements; and she had significant managerial experience, including managing the
Acquisition Front Door.

The panelists stated that although Complainant’s work quality was perfect in the details, she did
not demonstrate she had experience handling a high volume of actions and management staff of
which they were seeking for the job at issue. The panelists noted that the Acquisition Division
completed a high volume of work, i.e., 500 actions per year. The panelists further indicated that
Complainant did not fully answer each of the interview questions.
                                                3                                     2022003180

Regarding claim 2, Complainant’s third level supervisor (S3), the Acquisition Division Chief,
indicated that in October and November 2019, Complainant sought approval to go on a detail to
a Contracting Officer Technical Representative position with the Economic Reimbursable
Surveys Division. S3 denied Complainant’s request because their division was short staffed at
that time.

In its final decision, the Agency found that the alleged incident in claim 2 occurred in October
2019, but Complainant did not contact an EEO Counselor until August 31, 2021, which was
beyond the 45-day time limit set by the regulations. Regarding claim 1, the Agency found that
Complainant failed to establish that the Agency discriminated against her regarding her
nonselection. Complainant appealed from the Agency’s final decision.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law").

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he or she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would
support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509
U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
                                                4                                    2022003180

Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we find
that the Agency proffered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the alleged actions.
Regarding claim 1, Complainant was not selected for the GS-14, Supervisory Procurement
Analyst position because she did not interview as well as the Selectee, and she did not have
extensive managerial experience.       All three interview/selection panelists determined
unanimously that the Selectee was the top candidate among four candidates they interviewed.
Complainant did not show that she had experience handling a high volume of work in the
Acquisition Division and extensive managerial experience.

The SO indicated that the Selectee had been a GG-15, Branch Chief since 2016, and she had
extensive managerial experience and experience handling a high volume of work.            The
interview panel indicated that the Selectee performed well during her interview addressing her
experience working with very large information technology procurements and had significant
managerial experience, including managing the Acquisition Front Door.

We find that Complainant failed to rebut the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
not selecting Complainant. Upon review, we find that Complainant failed to show that her
qualifications for the position were plainly superior to the Selectee’s qualifications. See Wasser
v. Dep’t of Labor, EEOC Request No. 05940058 (Nov. 2, 1995). There is no evidence of a
discriminatory motivation on the part of the Agency for hiring the Selectee. We find that
Complainant has failed to show that the Agency’s action was motivated by discrimination as she
alleged in claim 1.

Regarding claim 2, the Agency dismissed the subject matter for untimely EEO Counselor contact
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2). Complainant indicated that she was denied her request
for a detail initially in October/November 2019. Complainant did not contact an EEO Counselor
regarding the matter until August 31, 2021, which was beyond the 45-day time limit set by the
regulations. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1). On appeal, Complainant provides no justification
to warrant an extension of the applicable time limit for contacting an EEO Counselor. Therefore,
we find the Agency’s dismissal of claim 2 proper.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision is AFFIRMED.
                                                5                                    2022003180

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                6                                     2022003180

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 5, 2022
Date
