             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Johnson P., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs
                               (Veterans Health Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021003266

                                 Hearing No. 430-2019-00189X

                              Agency No. 2004-0652-2018104529

                                           DECISION

On May 18, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we MODIFY
the Agency’s final action.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was an external applicant for the
position of Health System Administrator (Assistant Director), GS-0670-14, at the Richmond
Medical Center in Richmond, Virginia. The Agency advertised the position under Vacancy
Announcement Number: CAYO-10159093-18-DS-VHA6. He sought to rejoin the Agency after
resigning from the Agency in September 2015, after working as a Health System Specialist, GS-
0671-13/4, in the Agency’s San Diego Healthcare System, Office of the Director. Ultimately, the
Agency selected a Caucasian female for the position.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2021003266

On July 12, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of race (Black), sex (male), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when on May 15, 2018, he was not selected for
the Assistant Director position.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.

After the Agency repeatedly failed to comply with the AJ’s orders, the AJ granted Complainant’s
motion for sanctions on March 1, 2021, and issued default judgment against the Agency on the
underlying non-selection claim. To remedy the finding of discrimination, the AJ ordered
Complainant to submit a statement outlining the damages that he suffered as a result of the
discriminatory non-selection. The order indicated that after receiving the parties’ submissions,
the AJ would determine whether to hold a hearing on damages. Complainant timely submitted
the ordered statement of damages and emphasized that his submission would set “forth the
evidence supporting his claim for full and substantial monetary damages and equitable relief.”

In particular, Complainant detailed how he “suffered enormous stress following the non-
selection stemming from the realization that [his] career as VA Healthcare executive was
prematurely ended by the discrimination of the Richmond VA.” Complainant maintained that the
“non-selection wrapped a red flag on [his] employee file that would make any hiring official
question and investigate [his] employment.” He “constantly replayed the discrimination and its
effects on [his] career over and over again in [his] mind” and suffered sleeplessness, confusion,
sadness, and anger as a result of the non-selection. Complainant emphasized how the “physical
and psychological toll of the [VA] Richmond’s discrimination wreaked havoc on [his]
relationships with [his] wife, children, [and] extended family and friends.” He “became sullen,
surly, prickly, and stuck in a maze of what-ifs… wondering why this did and how could this
happen to [his]?” Complainant ‘became a shell of himself, an empty vessel of [a] man who used
to brim with confidence about [his] prospects.” Complainant stated that he initially sought
counseling, but when that did not work, he spent thousands of dollars on costly examinations and
medical procedures to treat his stress-related sleeplessness and headaches.

In support of his claim for damages, Complainant submitted multiple Explanations of Benefits
from his health insurance provider. He also submitted supporting statements from his wife and
brother, both of whom recalled a change in Complainant’s demeanor and health due to the
discrimination. Both witnesses claimed that Complainant’s non-selection for the position
effectively harmed his professional reputation and ultimately destroyed his career.

To remedy the finding of discrimination, Complainant sought the following remedies, which he
claimed constituted full relief:
                                                3                                    2021003266

       1. A total of $37,020.00 in pecuniary compensatory damages, reflecting the following: 2

           a. $4,800.00 for personal counseling;
           b. $5,125.00 for marital counseling;
           c. $10,448.00 in medical expenses

       2. Nonpecuniary compensatory damages in the amount of $300,000.00 and retirement at
          the GS-14 level.

Complainant did not, however, seek placement in the GS-14 Assistant Director as part of his
right to equitable relief. Complainant also did not seek an evidentiary hearing on the issue of
damages.

After considering Complainant’s statement of damages, and the Agency’s request to reduce the
damages, the AJ issued a decision on March 31, 2021, awarding Complainant a total of
$15.000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages for the harm that he suffered as a result of
the Agency’s unlawful action. In assessing this amount, the AJ relied on Pullman v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A45271 (Jan. 21, 2005), Lombardino v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC
Appeal No. 0720070007 (Nov. 27, 2009), and Driesbach v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No.
0120100617 (Sept. 20, 2011). The AJ, however, declined to award Complainant any pecuniary
damages because the AJ found that Complainant failed to causally link his medical and
counseling expenses to the Agency’s unlawful action.

Finding the AJ’s award of relief to be wholly inadequate, Complainant petitioned the AJ for
reconsideration of the decision. In his filing titled, Complainant’s Motion for Reconsideration Re
the Award of Non-Pecuniary Compensatory Damages, Complainant argued that he was entitled
to a substantially higher award because the Agency’s failure to select him for the GS-14
Assistant Director position, psychologically and physiologically injured him and totally
destroyed his opportunities for advancement in the prestigious Health Administration
occupational series. In support of such claim, Complainant submitted a list containing the names
of over a dozen GS-14 Assistant Directors in the Health Administration occupational series
across the country who were subsequently promoted to the GS-15 pay grade and the Senior
Executive Service (SES).

Complainant also identified 13 representative federal sector cases, where the Commission
awarded nonpecuniary compensatory damages between $100,000.00 to $200,000.00 for similar
harm. See, e.g., Durinzi v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A41946 (July 28, 2005)
(awarding $120,000 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages, where the agency’s failure to


2
  We are unable to discern how Complainant calculated his entitlement to $37,020.00 in total
pecuniary compensatory damages. By our calculation, the Complainant’s claimed expenses for
personal and marital counseling expenses and medical expenditures totaled $20,373.00. As
Complainant did not specifically raise on appeal the issue of his entitlement to pecuniary
compensatory damages, we need not resolve this discrepancy.
                                               4                                    2021003266

provide reasonable accommodations prevented complainant from returning to her normal tour of
duty and severely impacted her physical, emotional, mental, spiritual, and financial well-being
for a period of six years); Brendon L. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141161 (Feb.
3, 2015) (awarding $150,000.00 to complainant who “experienced embarrassment, humiliation,
panic attacks, anxiety, withdrawal from coworkers and family, and sleeping problems”); and
Dionne W. v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 0720150040 (Mar. 27, 2018) (awarding
$185,000.00 to complainant who “testified to experiencing humiliation, embarrassment,
uncontrollable crying, emotional distress, stress, anguish, sadness, anger, loss of interest in
activities which previously gave her joy, loss of laughter, and suffering damage to her career,
reputation, professionalism, and integrity”). Complainant sought an evidentiary hearing to
resolve the issue of damages in the event that the AJ denied his motion for reconsideration.

The AJ ultimately issued an order on April 29, 2021, denying Complainant’s motion to vacate
and reconsider the AJ’s March 31, 2021, 3 decision on liability and relief. In denying
Complainant’s motion, the AJ found Complainant’s contentions to be reiterations of the
contentions that he previously raised. After considering Complainant’s contentions and cited
case law, the AJ reaffirmed the decision to deny Complainant’s request for pecuniary damages
for lack of a causal nexus. The AJ also reaffirmed the decision to award Complainant a total of
$15,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages. Though Complainant’s motion for
reconsideration was limited to the issue of nonpecuniary compensatory damages, the AJ sua
sponte declined to consider Complainant’s entitlement to equitable relief in the form of
placement in the GS-14 Assistant Director position, as Complainant did not expressly request it
in his statement of damages.

Though the AJ’s April 29, 2021, decision afforded the Agency 40 calendar days of receipt of the
decision to issue a final order, Complainant prematurely filed his appeal on May 18, 2021. When
the Agency ultimately failed to issue a final order at the expiration of the 40-day period, 4 the
AJ’s April 29, 2021, decision became the Agency’s final action pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.109(i). This appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant alleges that the AJ’s award of compensatory damages was not sufficient and that
the AJ should have held a hearing on damages. Complainant also asserts that the AJ improperly
denied him equitable relief. 5 The Agency did not submit any contentions on appeal.



3
  As noted above, the AJ entered default judgment against the Agency on March 1, 2021;
however, the AJ’s March 1, 2021 order did not direct the Agency to issue a final order.
4
  Our review of the record shows that the Agency ultimately issued an untimely final order on
July 14, 2021, adopting the AJ’s March 1, 2021 and March 31, 2021 decisions.
5
  Following the submission of his appellate brief, Complainant filed a motion for sanctions
against the Agency for its approximately two-month delay in submitting the entire administrative
record to the Commission. After careful consideration, we deny Complainant’s motion.
                                                5                                     2021003266

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a)(stating that a
“decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review…”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Compensatory Damages Overview

When discrimination is found, an agency must provide a remedy that constitutes full, make-
whole relief to restore complainant as nearly as possible to the position he or she would have
occupied absent the discrimination. See, e.g., Franks v. Bowman Transp. Co., 424 U.S. 747, 764
(1976); Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 418-19 (1975); Adesanya v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01933395 (July 21, 1994). Compensatory damages are awarded to
compensate a complaining party for losses or suffering inflicted due to the discriminatory act or
conduct. See EEO MD-110 at Chap. 11, § VII (citing Carey v. Piphus 435 U.S. 247, 254 (1978)
(purpose of damages is to “compensate persons for injuries caused by the deprivation of
constitutional rights”)). Types of compensatory damages include damages for past pecuniary loss
(out-of-pocket loss), future pecuniary loss, and nonpecuniary loss (emotional harm). See EEO
MD-110 at Chap. 11, § VII.B; and Goetze v. Dep’t. of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01991530
(Aug. 23, 2001).

Nonpecuniary compensatory damages are losses that are not subject to precise quantification,
including emotional pain and injury to character, professional standing, and reputation. Id. There
is no precise formula for determining the amount of damages for nonpecuniary losses except that
the award should reflect the nature and severity of the harm and the duration or expected
duration of the harm. See Loving v. Dep’t of the Treas., EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29,
1997). The Commission notes that nonpecuniary compensatory damages are designed to remedy
the harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than to punish the agency for the
discriminatory action. Furthermore, compensatory damages should not be motivated by passion
or prejudice or be “monstrously excessive” standing alone but should be consistent with the
amounts awarded in similar cases. See Ward-Jenkins v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No.
01961483 (Mar. 4, 1999).

Complainants have the burden of proving the existence, nature and severity of the alleged
emotional harm and must also establish a causal relationship between the alleged harm and the
discrimination. Absent such proof of harm and causation, a complainant is not entitled to
compensatory damages, even if there were a finding of unlawful discrimination.
                                                 6                                      2021003266

The Commission has held that evidence of emotional distress should include detailed
information on physical or behavioral manifestations of the distress, if any, and any other
information on the intensity of the distress, information on the duration of the distress, and
examples of how the distress affected the complainant both on and off the job. Carle v. Dep’t of
the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993). In addition to a detailed statement by the
individual claiming emotional distress damages, other evidence of such damages may include
statements by health care professionals, such as physicians, psychologists, psychiatrists,
therapists or counselors, as well as friends, family or coworkers who could attest to the existence,
nature and severity of the complainant’s distress, its duration and causation.

Evidence from a health care provider or other expert, however, is not a mandatory prerequisite
for recovery of compensatory damages for emotional harm. See Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 01952288 (Apr 18, 1996) (citing Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC. Appeal
No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993)). Objective evidence of compensatory damages can include
statements from a complainant concerning his or her emotional pain or suffering, inconvenience,
mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to character or
reputation, injury to credit standing, loss of health, and any other non-pecuniary losses that are
incurred as a result of the discriminatory conduct. Id.

Statements from others including family members, friends, health care providers, other
counselors (including clergy) can also be provided to address the outward manifestations or
physical consequences of emotional distress, including sleeplessness, anxiety, stress, depression,
marital strain, humiliation, emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, or a nervous
breakdown. Id. Additionally, a complainant’s own testimony, along with the circumstances of a
particular case, can suffice to sustain his or her burden in this regard. Id. The more inherently
degrading or humiliating the defendant’s action is, the more reasonable it is to infer that a person
would suffer humiliation or distress from that action. Id. The absence of supporting evidence,
however, may affect the amount of damages appropriate in specific cases. Id.

When determining an award of nonpecuniary compensatory damages, the Commission may
consider the present-day value of comparable awards based on the consumer price index (CPI).
Thus, an AJ who is awarding damages should consider the amounts that the Commission
awarded in prior cases involving similar injuries and should determine whether circumstances
justify a higher or lower award. The AJ should adjust the award upward or downward according
to the relative severity of the complainant’s injury. The AJ may then take into consideration the
age of the comparable awards and adjust the current award accordingly. See Lara G. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 0520130618 (June 9, 2017).

Sufficiency of AJ’s Award of Nonpecuniary Compensatory Damages

In this case, the AJ determined that Complainant was entitled to $15.000.00 in nonpecuniary
compensatory damages for the harm that he suffered as a result of the discriminatory non-
selection.
                                                 7                                     2021003266

While the AJ considered Complainant’s statement of damages, including the comparator cases
listed in Complainant’s statement, the AJ ultimately relied on cases such as Pullman, supra,
where the Commission awarded damages in the range of $10,000.00 to $15,000.00.

On appeal, Complainant disagrees with the AJ’s assessment of $15,000.00 in nonpecuniary
compensatory damages and argues that the AJ made the following errors in assessing the award:

       (a) glossed over substantial portions of Complainant’s statement re damages;
       (b) failed to analyze those statements in the context of damages or the significant impact
           to Complainant, including the long-term suffering associated with the denial of
           employment with the Agency and the loss of his career opportunities and potential for
           advancement in the 0670 specialized job series;
       (c) failed to address the supporting statements of Complainant’s wife and brother; and
       (d) ignored mention, discussion or analysis of the many cases identified by Complainant
           as comparators.

Complainant also argues that the AJ’s decision to assess compensatory damages without holding
a hearing was an abuse of discretion because the AJ denied him the opportunity to address
certain key factors directly related to and which bear upon the psychological injuries that he
suffered. Furthermore, Complainant contends that his “fears and reactions to his non-selection
were magnified, especially since he reasonably perceived that his non-selection was a signal that
the VA was never to return him to a position of responsibility with career advancement.” He
emphasizes that his non-selection was not a “one-off” event, but a profound matter with ongoing
career advancement implications, as he was denied entry into a “uniquely prestigious
occupational series of health administration” covering a broad range of disciplines with upward
mobility.

Having reviewed the record, including Complainant’s contentions, we find that the AJ’s award
of $15,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory is insufficient to compensate Complainant for the
harm that he suffered. Our review of the Commission’s case law shows that awards in the range
of $50,000.00 to $70,000.00 (CPI adjusted value) are appropriate for cases involving similar
harm. See, e.g., Sharma v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0720080056 (Jan. 8, 2009)
(affirming AJ’s award of $50,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages and increasing the
amount to $70,160.03 as CPI adjusted value, despite minimal corroborating medical evidence,
where statements from family members showed that agency’s discriminatory non-selection
caused complainant to experience high anxiety, nightmares, feelings of hopelessness and
humiliation, and emotional imbalance); Alena C. v. Dep’t of Vet. Aff., EEOC Appeal No.
0720180003 (Apr. 12, 2018) (awarding $50,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages
($59,126.07 CPI adjusted value), for discriminatory non-selection, where the complainant began
to experience pain, muscle spasms, and headaches, felt a loss of self-confidence, and became
socially withdrawn); and Irvin M. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 2020005333
(June 8, 2022) (awarding $50,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages for discriminatory
non-selection, where statements from complainant’s spouse proved that complainant suffered
stress, anxiety, trouble sleeping, gastrointestinal issues, migraines, paranoia, and strained family
                                                8                                     2021003266

relationship, but other factors not attributable to the agency may have been contributory to
complainant’s injuries).

Given the extent of the harms that Complainant suffered, we find that an award at the higher end
of the range noted above is warranted. Based on our assessment of all relevant factors, including
Complainant’s contentions, supporting records, and witness affidavits, we conclude that an
award in the amount of $70,000.00 would fairly and adequately compensate Complainant for his
suffering. We find this amount is not motivated by passion or prejudice, is not “monstrously
excessive” standing alone, and is consistent with the amounts awarded in other cases.

In reaching this conclusion, we carefully considered the cases that Complainant cited on appeal;
however, we find them to be factually distinguishable from the instant case with regard to
severity, pervasiveness, and duration.

For example, in Durinzi, supra, the complainant suffered unabating harm for six years due to the
agency’s failure to provide reasonable accommodations which prevented complainant from
returning to her normal tour of duty and severely impacted her physical, emotional, mental,
spiritual, and financial well-being for a period of six years. Due, in part, to the duration of the
harm, the Commission awarded complainant $120,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory
damages.

In Brendon L., supra, the complainant endured over two years of nearly daily harassment not
only from his coworkers, but also from management officials because of his hearing disability.
The years of harassment, coupled with the agency’s failure to accommodate his hearing
disability, caused complainant to experience “embarrassment, humiliation, panic attacks, anxiety,
withdrawal from coworkers and family, and sleeping problems.” Due, in part, to the
pervasiveness and duration of the harassment, the Commission awarded complainant
$150,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages.

In Dionne W. supra, the complainant endured years of harassment and continuing negative
treatment. The agency’s actions caused complainant “humiliation, embarrassment,
uncontrollable crying, emotional distress, stress anguish, sadness, anger, loss of interest in
activities which previously gave her job, loss of laughter, and suffering damage to her career,
reputation, professionalism, and integrity.” The Commission ultimately upheld the AJ’s award of
$185,000.00 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages because the AJ “extensively justified’ the
extent and duration of the harm to support the award.

While we are mindful of the harm that Complainant suffered, we simply do not find the
circumstances concerning Complainant’s discriminatory non-selection to be comparable to the
extent and duration of the harm suffered by the complainants in the comparator cases. As such,
we do not find the comparator cases to be persuasive.

We also considered Complainant’s contention that the discriminatory non-selection was not a
“one-off” event but had profound and ongoing career advancement implications.
                                                 9                                     2021003266

While we are certainly cognizant of Complainant’s fears and reactions to the Agency’s unlawful
action, we ultimately find his assertion that he was denied upward mobility by virtue of the
Agency’s unlawful action to be speculative and presumptive in that he presumes without
evidence that he would have been promoted to the GS-15 and SES pay grades had he been
selected for the GS-14 position.

We recognize that Complainant believes that the AJ’s failure to hold a hearing on the issue of
damages adversely affected his ability to present his case regarding certain key factors that
directly bear upon his professional, psychological, and physiological injuries; however, we
nevertheless remain unpersuaded. We see no unresolved issues of credibility necessitating a
hearing. For the purposes of our analysis, we have assumed as true that over a dozen GS-14
Assistant Directors across the nation were promoted to the GS-15 and SES paygrades; however,
the fact remains that Complainant has presented no persuasive evidence establishing that his
career would have followed the same path had he been selected for the GS-14 Assistant Director
position. We have also accepted as true the statements from Complainant’s wife and brother.
Based, in part, on these statements, we have increased the Complainant’s entitlement to
nonpecuniary compensatory damages from $15,000.00 to $70,000.00. As we conclude that a
hearing would have no material impact on the outcome of the case, we find that the AJ did not
improperly deny Complainant the opportunity to present his case at a hearing. On the same
grounds, we deny Complainant’s request to remand the matter for an evidentiary hearing.

Equitable Relief

We turn now to the issue of Complainant’s entitlement to equitable relief. Having reviewed
Complainant’s contentions, we find that Complainant is not entitled to equitable relief in the
form of placement in the GS-14 Assistant Director position. While Complainant argues on
appeal that the AJ never ruled on the issue of equitable relief, our review of the record reveals
otherwise. Specifically, we note that on April 29, 2021, the AJ issued an order denying
Complainant’s motion to vacate and reconsider the AJ’s March 31, 2021 decision. In that
decision, the AJ sua sponte declined to consider whether Complainant was entitled to placement
in the GS-14 Assistant Director position, as Complainant never requested it.

While we acknowledge that Complainant is now asserting his right to placement in the GS-14
Assistant Director position as equitable relief, we find that Complainant cannot raise it on appeal,
as he never requested that remedy with the AJ. In Zetta B. v. Dep’t of Agric., EOC Appeal No.
2020003201 (Sept. 2, 2021), the Commission issued a similar ruling involving an analogous
matter. There, complainant alleged, in relevant part, that the agency subjected her to
discrimination when it discriminatory failed to select her for a position. Though the assigned AJ
ruled in complainant’s favor, the AJ nevertheless declined to award complainant any
nonpecuniary compensatory damages because complainant failed to request it. The Commission
ultimately rejected the agency’s appeal, and, notwithstanding the AJ’s ruling, ordered the agency
to conduct a supplemental investigation into complainant’s entitlement to nonpecuniary
compensatory damages.
                                                10                                    2021003266

On reconsideration, the Commission determined the award of nonpecuniary compensatory
damages was improper because complainant never requested that remedy with the AJ. See Zetta
B. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Request No. 2022000030 (Mar. 24, 2022). Given these analogous
precedents, we conclude that Complainant cannot, for the first time on appeal, request equitable
relief in the form of placement in the GS-14 Assistant Director position.

In reaching this conclusion, we considered Complainant’s contention that the AJ never asked
him to identify the equitable relief he wanted. To the contrary, we note that the AJ, in granting
Complainant’s motion for sanctions on March 1, 2021, expressly ordered Complainant to submit
a written statement outlining his claim for damages. While we recognize that the AJ may have
used the term “damages” in the colloquial sense to refer to Complainant’s entitlement to all
forms of relief, it is apparent to us that the AJ’s colloquial use of the word did not induce
confusion in either Complainant or his attorney. Specifically, we note that in his March 15, 2021,
response to the AJ’s order to provide a statement of damages, Complainant indicated he would
set “forth the evidence supporting his claim for full and substantial monetary damages and
equitable relief.” Though Complainant thoroughly addressed his entitlement to pecuniary and
nonpecuniary damages, he ultimately never requested placement in the GS-14 Assistant Director
position. We also note that Complainant’s motion for reconsideration of the AJ’s March 31,
2021, decision contains no mention of equitable relief. Given these factors, we are disinclined to
agree with Complainant.

Finally, we considered Complainant’s contention that he is entitled to placement in the GS-14
Assistant Director position in accordance with the Agency’s final order, which awarded him “full
make-whole relief.” While we acknowledge that the Agency’s final order includes a provision
for equitable relief, we note that the final order also states that the Agency will fully implement
the AJ’s decisions. Reading these provisions in conjunction, we find that the Agency intended to
grant equitable relief to the extent provided in the AJ’s decision. As the AJ expressly declined to
consider Complainant’s entitlement to placement in the GS-14 Assistant Director position, we
decline to do so now for the reasons discussed above.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we MODIFY the Agency’s final action and direct the Agency to
comply with the ORDER below.

                                             ORDER

Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, to the extent the Agency has
not done so already, the Agency shall pay Complainant a total of $70,000.00 in nonpecuniary
compensatory damages.
                                                11                                    2021003266

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration.
                                                  12                                2021003266

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                               13                                    2021003266

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 15, 2022
Date
