             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Byron P., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                      Carlos Del Toro,
                                         Secretary,
                                   Department of the Navy,
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2020003558


                                Agency No. 19-00178-00302

                                         DECISION

On May 27, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the
Agency’s April 27, 2020 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a General Engineer,
ND801-04, in the A44 Software Applications & System Security Engineering Branch, with the
Agency’s Naval Surface Warfare Center in Dahlgren, Virginia.

On January 4, 2019, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of age (YOB:1953) and reprisal (prior protected EEO
activity) when:

       1.     On October 12, 2018, Complainant was not selected for the A42 Branch Head
              position;



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2020003558

       2.     On December 17, 2018, Complainant was chastised for taking too many
              professional development courses;
       3.     On December 20, 2018, Complainant was not selected for a Group Lead position
              within his Branch; and
       4.     On January 30, 2019, Complainant was notified that his reconsideration request
              for DEMO incentive pay for fiscal year 2018 was denied, after receiving
              notification on December 17, 2018, that he would not receive DEMO incentive
              pay for fiscal year 2018.

Complainant’s first-level supervisor was the A44 Branch Head (S1), his second-level supervisor
was the Division Head, A40, Cyber Technologies & Software Systems Division, and his third-
level supervisor was the Department Head of A Department (S3).

Regarding claim (1), in August 2018, Complainant applied for the position of Manager, ND-05,
under Vacancy Announcement No. ST-10260892-18-JF. Complainant was included on the
Certificate of Eligibles and was one of seven candidates referred for an interview. After the
interviews, the interview panel notified S2, the Recommending Official, of their decision. Three
candidates were unanimously recommended as “Most Qualified” with the eventual Selectee
listed as the interview panel’s first choice. The panel did not recommend Complainant for
further consideration. Complainant believed he was the most qualified for the position because
he had performed this type of work before, had a “professional master’s degree in applied
physics, Defense Acquisition University Level III and Level II,” and had years of experience
supporting Joint Operations and Joint Projects with the Joint Warfare Analysis Center through
Joint Forces Command, (a customer of A42). Complainant asserted that he was more qualified
for the position of A42 Branch Head because he worked for the Agency for many years, from
1997-2000, in a group that did the same work as A42. He alleged that he had experience in
managing engineering projects and managing people working with all services including Army,
Navy, Marines and Air Force, as well as the global communications command, control, and
logistics infrastructure necessary to support them.

S2 explained the interview questions for the A42 Branch Head position were developed based on
the desired skill set, technical discipline, and experience with Mission Assurance, which is
central to the branch’s mission. He indicated that the questions were vetted and approved by
Human Resources in keeping with their standard process. The interview panel presented their
interview findings to him, and S2 conducted the second interviews with the three candidates
recommended by the panel for follow-up interviews. S2 ultimately recommended Selectee to
S3, the Selecting Official. S3 accepted his recommendation and the position was offered to
Selectee.

One of the panel members (PM1) explained that the Selectee’s experience, demeanor, presence,
knowledge, confidence, and attitude contributed to her better answers. Further, PM1 noted that
Complainant was not better qualified because he had limited history with the branch and had no
current knowledge of A42 branch operations.
                                                3                                     2020003558

Another panel member (PM2) stated that Complainant did not have recent personnel oversight
responsibilities on his resume, and he did not describe any in his interview. PM2 added that
Complainant’s most recent experiences were more related to program management than line
management and his identification of the branch challenges was extremely limited and did not
align with the challenges that the panel chair briefed them on prior to the interview. Further, she
explained that Complainant failed to answer question eight and part of question two, so the panel
was unable to consider this information. Meanwhile, the Selectee talked about the growth
opportunity, her comfort with leading an unfamiliar organization, and the experience she had
doing so. PM2 noted that the selectee discussed her knowledge of mission assurance and
understanding vulnerabilities as well as her ability to be a decisive leader, ensuring technical
rigor, assessing risks and enabling people to be successful. The Selectee also described her
experience shaping and teaming, interacting with senior leadership, how she would motivate
others and grow the branch, and explained her immediate plan of action as well as her long-term
plans.

Another panel member (PM3) testified that although Complainant demonstrated vast technical
knowledge and experience, his answers to interview questions did not demonstrate knowledge
about the branch head role as he did not provide insight into how he would manage as a branch
head or comprehensively describe the responsibilities of a branch head. Even though the
Selectee had weaknesses knowing the exact reality or situation in the branch, she proposed
actions to learn the organization or provide relevant experience making logical assumptions or
comparisons about organizations.

As to claim (3), S1 sent an email on December 3, 2018, advertising an opportunity to serve as a
Group Lead. Complainant expressed interest in the role and was interviewed by S1 and the Anti-
Tamper (AT) Technical Lead. Complainant believed he answered their questions well during the
interview and said he provided examples on how to motivate the team. Complainant was
notified he was not selected when S1 sent an email on December 20, 2018, announcing the two
candidates that were selected as the new Group Leads.

S1 explained that it was an internal role and not an official hiring action. S1 and the AT
Technical Lead developed the interview questions and interviewed the candidates. S1 explained
that the factors used in assessing the candidates included an understanding of the Group Lead
role, the group tasking, and the issues facing the group as well as leadership potential and vision
for the future. While Complainant’s resume showed relevant experience, during the interview,
Complainant failed to answer many of the questions directly; did not seem aware of the issue and
concerns facing the group; and his responses were that he would do what the current Group Lead
was doing without offering real solutions or ideas. Meanwhile, the selected candidate had
concrete ideas for the future of the group and well-documented technical and leadership
qualifications.
                                              4                                   2020003558

With respect to claim (4), on December 11, 2018, S1 gave Complainant his Notice of Projected
Pay Adjustment for Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 notifying him that that he would not receive DEMO
(pay for performance) incentive pay for FY2018. On December 17, 2018, Complainant and S1
met again to discuss Complainant’s concern of the lack of bonus pay and the process for DEMO
pay reconsideration. Complainant stated S1 informed him that his team gave negative feedback
regarding his contributions to the team.

S1 explained that she sent Complainant an email on December 20, 2018, stating she re-reviewed
Complainant’s self-assessment, feedback from his Group Lead, the AT subject matter expert,
and the DEMO benchmarks. She explained Complainant had acceptable performance which was
reflected in his organization contribution score, but the Complainant’s Yearly Objective and
Expectations set her intention for him to lead AT projects and provide guidance to customers.
However, throughout the year, Complainant was counseled that his view of AT guidance and
process is different from the Agency’s view, which impacted his ability to meet technical and
leadership expectations since he failed to demonstrate an understanding of the AT process in
order to obtain a leadership role in the organization. Complainant then formally requested
reconsideration of the FY2018 DEMO decision to S3. S3 denied Complainant’s request for
reconsideration on January 30, 2019, because his investigation found Complainant was
adequately compensated.

As to claim (2), Complainant averred S1 and S3 chastised him for taking too many professional
development courses when S1 said they took into consideration the training classes when
determining his DEMO payout, however, the classes did not change their decision. Complainant
interpreted this comment as management stating he needed to pay more attention to AT classes
instead of cybersecurity classes. 2 S1 and S3 both denied chastising Complainant for any
training. S1 affirmed that she would guess that Complainant had taken six to eight classes over
the year, but they did not affect his job performance in a positive or negative way.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final agency
decision (FAD) and the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the
decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that management subjected him
to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The instant appeal followed.




2
  The cybersecurity classes were awarded to Complainant in a previous EEO complaint the
previous year before he came to work in Dahlgren.
                                               5                                   2020003558

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of
a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas,
411 U.S. at 802 n. 13. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately
prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's
explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S.
133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Hon. Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Tx. Dep’t of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

Assuming arguendo Complainant established a prima face case of discrimination and reprisal,
the Commission finds Complainant failed to present evidence to rebut the Agency’s legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. With regard to claim (1), the selection panelists all
agreed that Complainant was not among the top three candidates. As PM3 summarized,
Complainant’s answers to the interview questions did not demonstrate knowledge about the
branch head role as he did not provide insight into how he would manage as a branch head or
comprehensively describe the responsibilities of a branch head. By contrast, PM2 pointed to the
eventual Selectee’s description of her experience shaping and teaming, interacting with senior
leadership, how she would motivate others and grow the branch, and explained her immediate
plan of action as well as her longer-term plans. As a result, the panel did not recommend
Complainant for further consideration by the selecting official.

With respect to claim (2), management officials denied chastising Complainant for taking any
training. S1 acknowledged that she met with Complainant to discuss his request for
reconsideration of his DEMO payout but did not believe that she chastised him in any way
regarding the classes he had taken or planned to take. She stated that she believed that
Complainant’s training did not negatively affect his job performance.
                                                  6                                      2020003558

As to claim (3), S1 stated that Complainant had the relevant experience and indicated knowledge
of the functional work for the Group Leader position; however during his interview, most of his
responses were that he would do what the current Group Leader was doing, and he failed to
directly answer many of the questions. S1 noted that Complainant was unaware of the issues and
concerns facing the group and offered no real solutions or ideas. Meanwhile, the selectee’s
technical and leadership qualifications were well documented, he was respected by the whole
organization, and he communicated concrete ideas for the future.

Finally, regarding claim (4), S1 stated that she informed Complainant that he would not receive
any DEMO incentive pay for FY2018 based on Complainant’s contributions made during the
rating period and his continued technical professional growth. S1 stressed that Complainant had
an acceptable performance and his successes were reflected in his organizational contribution
score, but she believed they were in line with the benchmarks and others with similar
responsibilities. Ultimately, S3 confirmed that Complainant’s compensation was adequate for
his organizational contribution and his request for reconsideration did not provide any basis to
alter that initial decision.

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency's stated reasons are merely a
pretext for discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 9,
1996). Complainant can do this directly by showing that the Agency's proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence. Tx. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

We note that Complainant chose not to request a hearing; therefore, the Commission does not
have the benefit of an Administrative Judge's credibility determinations after a hearing and can
only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. The Commission finds no
persuasive evidence that Complainant's protected classes were a factor in any of the Agency's
actions. In particular, with respect to the non-selections at issue, Complainant failed to show that
his qualifications for the positions were plainly superior to those of the selectees. In this case,
the selectees had attributes that justified their selections, and the selection officials affirmed that
they believed the selectees were better equipped to meet the Agency's needs. In the absence of
evidence of unlawful discrimination, the Commission will not second guess the Agency's
assessment of the candidates' qualifications. Tex. Dept. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at
259.

At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance
of the evidence that the Agency’s reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on
the basis of discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Complainant failed to carry this burden. As a
result, the Commission finds that Complainant has not established that he was subjected to
discrimination or reprisal as alleged.
                                                 7                                     2020003558

                                         CONCLUSION

After a review of the record in its entirety, including consideration of all statements submitted on
appeal, it is the decision of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision because the preponderance of the evidence of record does not establish
that discrimination or reprisal occurred.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                8                                     2020003558

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                       Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 31, 2022
Date
