             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Derrick P., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                  Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                              Department of Homeland Security
                           (Immigration and Customs Enforcement),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021000327

                                Hearing No. 520-2010-00320X

                               Agency No. HS-ICE-25033-2016

                                          DECISION

On October 16, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
September 16, 2020, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE) Mentoring Program Manager, GS 14 at the Agency’s ICE
Headquarters in Washington, D.C.

On December 18, 2015, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (African-American), age (56), and reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when he was


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2021000327

subjected to numerous incidents of harassment, including but not limited to: his second-line
supervisor, the Chief of Staff (CoS) for the Office of Training and Development, offered him no
feedback on his Individual Development Plan; he was removed from his temporary duty
reassignment to a supervisory position and returned to his nonsupervisory position; his
November 2013 and February 2014 performance appraisals contained negative narratives and led
to him being excluded from receiving performance evaluation bones; his supervisors, the CoS
and the Unit Chief (UC), revoked his telework agreement; the UC assigned him a 2015 annual
performance rating of “Achieved Expectations” and a total numerical score that left him
ineligible to receive merit pay; and the UC repeatedly scolded him in a harsh and demeaning
manner in front of other employees. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing
but subsequently withdrew his request. Prior to the issuance of the final decision, the Agency
determined that a supplemental investigation was necessary. The supplemental investigation was
completed on May 29, 2020 and thereafter, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision found that, with respect to the discrete claim of
Complainant’s 2015 performance appraisal, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for its action and Complainant did not submit any evidence to support his assertions of
pretext. The decision also found that Complainant had not established that he was subjected to a
hostile work environment because the incidents taken together were neither severe nor pervasive
enough to constitute a hostile work environment. The decision concluded that Complainant
failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                         ANALYSIS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).




2
 The Agency dismissed all of Complainant’s claims except his claims regarding his November
2015 performance evaluation as discrete acts of discrimination on the grounds of untimely
counselor contact, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2). See Report of Investigation (ROI) at
58-60. The Agency noted that they would be considered as evidence of a hostile work
environment.
                                                3                                     2021000327

Sanctions

Complainant contends the Agency should be sanctioned for its delay in not issuing its decision in
a timely manner, noting that the Agency waited almost two years before determining that a
supplemental investigation was necessary, further delaying the issuance of its decision, which
also was not issued in a timely manner following the completion of the supplemental
investigation. EEOC regulations provide that an agency shall issue the final decision within 60
days of receiving notification that a complainant has requested an immediate decision or within
60 days of the end of the 30-day period for the complainant to request a hearing or an immediate
final decision where the complainant has not requested either a hearing or a decision. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.110(b). Here, Complainant withdrew his request for a hearing on September 17, 2018 and
the AJ remanded the case for the Agency to issue its final decision on January 7, 2020.
Thereafter, the supplemental investigation was completed on May 29, 2020 and the final
decision was issued on September 16, 2020.

We find that the delay was not unreasonable under the circumstances and sanctions are not
warranted. See e.g., Josefina L. v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0120142023 (July 19,
2016), req. for recon. den’d, EEOC Request No. 0520170108 (Feb. 9, 2017) (finding that the
Agency’s 571-day delay in issuing a final decision did not warrant sanctions, as complainant did
not show she was prejudiced by the delay); Jocelyn R. v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No.
0120152852 (Mar. 11, 2016) (citing Vunder v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A55147
(May 12, 2006) (declining to sanction an agency that issued a final decision after approximately
371 days)). To the extent Complainant attributes bad faith to the Agency’s decision to conduct a
supplemental investigation and thereby extend the time in which to issue its final decision, there
is no evidence in the record to support his assertions and absent any evidence in the record, we
decline to attribute such bad faith to the Agency.

Adequacy of the Investigation

Complainant has challenged the adequacy of the investigation. Investigations of discrimination
complaints are governed by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108 and the instructions contained in the
Commission's EEO MD-110. See EEO MD-110, Chap. 6 (“Development of Impartial and
Appropriate Factual Records”). An adequate agency investigation is one that is developed
impartially and contains an appropriate factual record. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b). “An appropriate
factual record is one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw conclusions as to whether
discrimination occurred.” 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b); EEO MD-110, Chap. 6, § § I, IV.B., IV.C.
An investigator must be unbiased, objective and thorough. Id. at § V.C. The investigator must
obtain all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome. Id. at §
V.D.

We note that Complainant’s first-line supervisor, the UC, was not interviewed during the initial
investigation because she had retired prior to the investigation being conducted and the
investigator was not able to obtain her current contact information. See Report of Investigation
(ROI) at 133.
                                                4                                    2021000327

We find that the investigator made a good faith effort to contact the UC and the failure to
interview her does not indicate that the investigation was inadequate. We further reject
Complainant’s contention that the Agency did not adequately investigate his reprisal claim.
Complainant’s argument appears to be limited to the fact that the investigation did not
sufficiently inquire into the details of Complainant’s prior EEO activity. We emphasize,
however, that the Agency did not dispute that Complainant had prior EEO activity and therefore,
a specific investigation into the nature of Complainant’s prior EEO activity was not necessary.
Moreover, we find that the Agency’s investigation and its decision adequately summarized
Complainant’s prior EEO activity. We find that, under the circumstances of this case, the record
is adequately developed such that we can draw conclusions as to whether discrimination
occurred.

Untimely Counselor Contact

We will also briefly address the Agency’s dismissal of all of Complainant’s alleged incidents of
harassment except the November 2015 performance evaluation as discrete acts of discrimination.
29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1) provides that an aggrieved person must initiate contact with an EEO
Counselor within 45 days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of
a personnel action, within 45 days of the effective date of the action. To the extent Complainant
provided an estimate of the timing of the occurrence of the alleged incidents, many of
Complainant’s alleged incidents of harassment occurred in 2012 and 2013 and Complainant first
contacted an EEO counselor on November 10, 2015. See ROI at 31. Complainant has not
presented any justification to delay or toll the time limit. We therefore find that the Agency
properly dismissed Complainant’s claims except for his allegations concerning his November
2015 performance evaluation for untimely counselor contact.

Complainant’s Allegations of Discrimination

Contrary to Complainant’s argument on appeal, we find that the Agency’s decision accurately
recounted the relevant material facts and correctly identified the legal standards to prove that
Complainant was subjected to disparate treatment on the basis of his race, age, or reprisal. The
CoS stated that the UC gave Complainant an “Achieved Expectations” on his 2015 Annual
Performance Appraisal because he “met his goals,” and the UC found that he was “non-
responsive in his communications.” See ROI at 109. Complainant disputed his performance
evaluation, insisting it included inaccurate information. We note, however, that Complainant did
not provide any evidence to support his assertions and Complainant’s subjective opinion of his
own performance is not sufficient to establish pretext or otherwise cast doubt on the Agency’s
reasons. See Complainant v. Dep’t of Housing and Urban Dev’t, EEOC Appeal No.
0120122630 (March 9, 2015). While it is clear that Complainant disagrees with the Agency’s
explanations, mere disagreement with an Agency’s actions does not establish pretext. See
Ambrose M. v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 0120180225 (June 11, 2019).
                                               5                                    2021000327

We further find that the Agency’s decision correctly identified the legal standards to prove that
Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment and correctly found that Complainant
failed to establish that he was subjected to a hostile work environment as alleged. To the extent
Complainant challenges the Agency’s failure to adequately consider the opinions of several of
his coworkers that the UC’s demeanor was generally harsh and seemed particularly belittling to
African-American employees, we note that neither Complainant’s subjective assertion that the
UC’s demeanor was harsh nor Complainant’s coworkers’ personal opinions are sufficient to
establish an objectively offensive hostile work environment as required by Title VII. See Harris
v. Forklift Systems, 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993) (“Conduct that is not severe or pervasive enough to
create an objectively hostile or abusive work environment -- an environment that a reasonable
person would find hostile or abusive -- is beyond Title VII’s purview.”). While it is clear that
Complainant had issues with the UC’s management style, EEO laws do not protect an employee
against adverse treatment due to a supervisor’s personality quirks or autocratic attitude. See
Domingo M. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 2020004044 (Dec. 2, 2020).
Moreover, there is no evidence to indicate a nexus between Complainant’s protected EEO
activity and the UC’s treatment of him; rather, the evidence indicates that Complainant perceived
the UC’s demeanor to be harsh and belittling even before Complainant engaged in his protected
activity. We therefore affirm the Agency’s finding that Complainant did not establish that he
was subjected to a hostile work environment due to any of his protected bases.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding that Complainant
did not establish that he was subjected to discrimination as alleged.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                  6                                   2021000327

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  7                                     2021000327

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 15, 2022
Date
