             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Claudia A., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                       (Southern Area),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2020005461

                                 Agency No. 4G-752-0307-19

                                          DECISION

On September 27, 2020, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 27, 2020, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier, Q-
01/O, at the McKinney Post Office in McKinney, Texas.

On January 14, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of national origin (Hispanic) 2 and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when:



1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2 Although Complainant alleged discrimination on the basis of race (Hispanic), the Commission

considers the term “Hispanic” to be reflective of national origin rather than race. See Angela F.
v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2019003846 (Feb. 4, 2020) at fn. 2.
                                               2                                    2020005461

       1. Beginning on August 19, 2019, and ongoing, her request for light duty work
          accommodations was not granted;
       2. Beginning on or about August 19, 2019, management would only allow her to use
          192 hours of the 240 hours approved advance sick leave hours;
       3. Beginning on or about September 3, 2019, and ongoing, she was only allowed to
          work four hours per day;
       4. On unspecified dates, management charged her a total of 57.63 hours of annual leave
          without her permission; and
       5. On unspecified dates, her postmaster sent her home for two days.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to
prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

In finding no discrimination, the Agency carefully summarized the underlying facts and
determined that management either had legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for taking the
alleged actions or had denied the allegations. While the Agency considered Complainant’s
evidence of pretext, the Agency ultimately found that Complainant failed to establish a causal
nexus between her protected bases and the alleged actions. Consequently, the Agency concluded
that Complainant could not prevail on the merits of her complaint.

This appeal followed. Neither Complainant nor the Agency submitted contentions on appeal.

Having reviewed the record, we find that the Agency correctly analyzed the facts and law in this
case to determine that Complainant did not show that she was subjected to discrimination as
alleged. Concerning her allegations of disparate treatment discrimination, he must satisfy the
three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v.
Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). In reaching this conclusion, we note that Complainant has not
offered any arguments as to why the Agency erred in finding no discrimination or cited to
evidence that she believes substantiates her allegations.

As our own independent review of the record reveals no reversible errors, we shall AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                                  3                                   2020005461

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                4                                    2020005461

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 18, 2022
Date
