             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Opal V., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                      Antony Blinken,
                                         Secretary,
                                     Department of State,
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2021004223

                                  Agency No. DOS-0208-20

                                         DECISION

On July 1, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 3, 2021, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked for the Agency as a FS-
03 Information Programs Supervisor in the Information Processing Center (IPC) at the U.S.
Embassy in Brussels, Belgium.

During the relevant time period, Complainant’s first-line supervisor was the Information
Programs Officer (IPO). Report of Investigation (ROI) at 58. Complainant is female, the IPO is
male, and Complainant supervised three direct-hire American employees, who are males. ROI at
59, 101-03. Complainant alleged that she engaged in protected EEO activity when she opposed
“the repetitious use of a sexist term to demean and humiliate a female supervisor” and when she
contacted an EEO counselor to initiate the instant complaint. ROI at 59-60.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2021004223

According to Complainant, during a January 31, 2020, counseling session, the IPO advised her
that, on several occasions since October 2019, two of her subordinates (Subordinate-1 and
Subordinate-2) had complained to the IPO about Complainant and the term, “mothering,” to
describe their objections to her management style. ROI at 61. Complainant stated that
“mothering” was a sexist insult that was specifically targeted at women. Complainant alleged
that, during the January 31 counseling session, she objected to the use of the term “mothering,”
informing the IPO that it was a sexist term and that she found it extremely offensive. ROI at 65,
78-79. Complainant stated, however, that the IPO told her that he agreed with her subordinates’
complaints and that she needed to change her management style and take management and
leadership courses. ROI at 61-62, 65, 77, 80.

Complainant stated that, for a four-month period, the IPO tasked her subordinates directly
without her knowledge in an attempt to appease their concerns about Complainant and exclude
her from supervisory oversight. ROI at 61. Complainant averred that the situation became so bad
that she rarely had any idea where her subordinates were or what work they were performing.
ROI at 61. According to Complainant, during the January 31 meeting, the IPO directed her not to
attempt to resolve the issue with her subordinates unless he was also present. ROI at 61.
Complainant averred that she left the meeting emotionally devastated and in tears. ROI at 78.

The IPO stated that he met with Complainant on January 31, 2020, after receiving three separate
complaints, one from of each of Complainant’s subordinates. ROI at 103. According to the IPO,
he referenced the term “mothering” to relay how two of her subordinates characterized her
interactions with them. ROI at 103. The IPO averred that he was concerned that Complainant
would not accept general feedback and that he decided to share some of the details from the
employees’ complaints with her and that, at the time, he felt using the term “mothering” was
necessary to convey the concerns of Subordinate-1 and Subordinate-2. ROI at 103, 108. The IPO
stated that, in retrospect, he should have paraphrased the complaints of Complainant’s
subordinates and substituted the term “micromanagement.” ROI at 103, 108.

The IPO averred that he told Complainant that he agreed with her subordinates that her verbal
and written communications were detailed and “clinically precise,” that the tone of her messages
was sometimes dry, and that her communication style could be perceived as micromanagement.
ROI at 109. The IPO denied prohibiting Complainant from resolving the issue directly with her
subordinates, stating that he specifically told her to talk to her employees and suggested she use
active listening skills and ask open-ended questions. ROI at 105-06. According to the IPO, he did
ask Complainant not to let her subordinates know that he had repeated their concerns, since they
had approached him in confidence. ROI at 105. The IPO averred that, if Complainant told her
subordinates that the IPO had shared their complaints with her, he felt that would lead to
confrontation and cause employees to remain silent and not share concerns with him in the
future. ROI at 105.
                                                 3                                    2021004223

The record contains a January 31, 2020 memorandum for the record from the IPO regarding his
mid-year counseling session with Complainant. ROI at 118. In the memorandum, the IPO
informed Complainant that she was a good supervisor and that he expected that she would do
well as an IPO during her onward assignment. ROI at 118. The IPO noted that he had received
complaints from Subordinate-1, Subordinate-2 and Complainant’s third American subordinate
(Subordinate-3) about Complainant’s “mothering” and “micro-managing” supervisory style and
had personally witnessed some of this behavior himself. ROI at 118. The IPO averred that he
reviewed emails Complainant sent to Subordinate-1 as examples. ROI at 118. According to the
IPO, Complainant noted that her subordinates bypassed her and went directly to the IPO, when
they should have come to Complainant instead. ROI at 118. According to the IPO, he and
Complainant talked about the emails again and, while the IPO agreed that the emails gave very
clear instruction, they could be viewed as “clinically precise and almost cold.” ROI at 119. The
IPO stated that Complainant “was visibly upset” at the meeting and seemed to be in denial that
there was an issue with her communications. ROI at 119.

Shortly thereafter, Subordinate-1 requested to serve as an EEO counselor. ROI at 104. On
February 24, 2020, Complainant provided the IPO with a memorandum stating that she could not
in good conscience support Subordinate-1’s nomination because the IPO told her that
Subordinate-1 had gone behind her back to complain to the IPO that Complainant was
“mothering” him. ROI at 120. Complainant noted that she found the term “mothering” to be
sexist and indicative of gender bias. ROI at 120. According to Complainant, Subordinate-1’s
behavior did not align with the qualities of an effective EEO counselor. ROI at 120. Complainant
asked that she be allowed to recuse herself from preparing a statement endorsing Subordinate-1’s
request, noting that, if the IPO believed that Subordinate-1 deserved the nomination, she would
not object if the IPO provided a statement endorsing his request. ROI at 120.

According to the IPO, he discussed Complainant’s memorandum with his supervisor, the
Information Management Officer (IMO), and the Deputy Human Resources Officer (HR-1). ROI
at 104. The IPO stated that the IMO told him that he would need to have Complainant explain to
Subordinate-1 why she did not support his nomination. ROI at 104. The IPO averred that HR-1
advised him that, while the term “mothering” was inappropriate, it did not, on its own “constitute
an EEO violation” because he did not believe that it met the “reasonable person standard.” ROI
at 104. According to the IPO, he agreed that the term was sexist and asked Complainant to meet
with him and Subordinate-1 to discuss it, as well as other events. ROI at 104.

On February 25, 2020, Complainant met with the IPO, Subordinate-1, and HR-1. 2 ROI at 61, 80,
106. According to Complainant, she had asked HR-1 to attend the meeting as an unbiased
witness. ROI at 79. According to Complainant, Subordinate-1 apologized for using the term
“mothering” and said that he was more dissatisfied with the post than with Complainant. ROI at
61. Complainant averred that, when asked why he did not approach Complainant directly,
Subordinate-1 said he had a previous negative experience with a female supervisor and chose to
approach the IPO first to seek validation and advice on how to proceed. ROI at 61.


2
    Complainant stated that, by February 25, 2020, Subordinate-2 had departed the post. ROI at 61.
                                               4                                    2021004223

Complainant alleged that, instead of trying to correct the situation, the IPO decided to
accommodate Subordinate-1’s insecurity and undermined Complainant’s authority by assigning
Subordinate-1 tasks without Complainant’s knowledge. ROI at 61. Complainant stated that the
February meeting with HR was the first time that the IPO corrected Subordinate-1’s use of the
term, showing that the IPO did not understand that “mothering” was sexist or insensitive. ROI at
80-81. Complainant stated that, while she accepted Subordinate-1’s apology at the meeting, she
still had an issue with how the IPO handled everything. ROI at 85.

Subordinate-1 stated that, around late October 2019, he had approached the IPO in private about
his frustration with Complainant’s style of management and asked for guidance on improving
communication. ROI at 195-96. According to Subordinate-1, Complainant would supervise him
in a way that made him feel that she had zero confidence in his abilities. ROI at 195.
Subordinate-1 denied that he used the term “mothering” to degrade Complainant, and he averred
that he subsequently realized that the term could be considered sexist, which is why he
apologized profusely at the meeting with the IPO and HR-1. ROI at 195-96.

According to the IPO, after the February 25 meeting, he thought the matter had been fully
addressed. ROI at 114. The IPO stated that, after the meeting, he had a follow-up meeting with
Subordinate-1 in March 2020 at which he told Subordinate-1 that the term “mothering” had no
place at work and suggested that he “delete it from his vocabulary.” ROI at 104, 107. HR-1
stated that he did not feel the need to address the use of the term “mothering” because
Subordinate-1’s apology to Complainant at the meeting seemed sincere. ROI at 141.

The record contains a February 25, 2020 memorandum for the record written by the IPO. ROI at
121-22. According to the IPO, when Complainant provided him the memorandum on February
24 stating that she could not support Subordinate-1’s nomination because of his use of the term
“mothering” and that she had not shared this with Subordinate-1, the IPO stated that her
objection “could be viewed as retaliation” for Subordinate-1 coming to the IPO, which the IPO
said, “he had every right to do.” ROI at 121. According to the IPO, at the February 25 meeting,
he thanked Complainant and Subordinate-1 for their candor and willingness to address their
concerns openly and stated that, while his door would always be open, moving forward,
Subordinate-1 should expect the IPO to ask him if he had spoken with Complainant on
operational issues. ROI at 122. The IPO noted that, after the meeting, he met with Complainant
and discussed Subordinate-1’s specific use of the term “mothering.” ROI at 122. According to
the IPO, he told Complainant that she was right that the term was inappropriate, and that
Subordinate-1 needed to hear that feedback again, as it had not been the focus of the discussion
between Complainant and Subordinate-1 during the meeting. ROI at 122. The IPO stated that he
asked Complainant if she wanted to address that with Subordinate-1, but Complainant responded
that she would prefer that the IPO discuss that with him. ROI at 122.

The IPO averred that the Agency operates on a hierarchical management structure and stated that
there were times where he or his supervisor directly tasked IPC staff to attend to various issues
or requests. ROI at 104.
                                               5                                   2021004223

The IPO stated that these were not daily occurrences, and, while he denied excluding
Complainant from oversight, he acknowledged that sometimes he did not inform her of such
assignments after the fact. ROI at 104. According to HR-1, although Complainant did not
complain about the IPO assigning work directly to her subordinates, forbidding her to resolve
issues with her subordinates, or any harassment, he did remember receiving a phone call from
the IPO asking if it was appropriate for him to task subordinates within his section who were
supervised by an employee supervised by the IPO. ROI at 139. HR-1 stated that he could not
remember the date of the phone call and that he informed the IPO that it was fine to task all
subordinate employees within his section when necessary and in the interest of meeting current
customer and job demands. ROI at 139. Complainant alleged that the IPO reaching out to HR-1
to ask if he could directly task Complainant’s subordinates showed the IPO’s intention to
marginalize her position and justify his behavior. ROI at 83-84.

Complainant averred that, in May 2020, with only 60 days remaining before her projected
transfer to another post, the IPO increased the workload for her section by making special
training requests, project assignments, work requirements, and award nominations with
unrealistic deadlines. ROI at 63. According to Complainant, the IPO assigned her all of these
tasks shortly after learning that she had contacted an EEO counselor. ROI at 63, 86. Complainant
alleged that, while she believed that the IPO was targeting her directly with the increased
workload, he increased the workload for the entire section, making it harder to show that he was
targeting Complainant. ROI at 60. Complainant stated that this sudden amount of tasking within
such a short period was unprecedented. ROI at 63. According to Complainant, her section’s
workload did not decrease as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, noting that she was teleworking
two and a half days per week but could only perform duties related to performing classified
operations while in the office. ROI at 74, 86.

The IPO stated that, in May 2020, as a result of maximizing telework since March 13, 2020, the
workload was dramatically decreased. ROI at 110-13. The IPO noted that he requested
Complainant send the work requirements on May 13, 2020, which was before he was contacted
by an EEO counselor on May 14, and that it was an annual requirement that must be completed
within 45 days of April 16. ROI at 110-11. The IPO estimated that it would take 20 minutes to
draft the work requirements, 20 minutes to enter them into the system, and 20 minutes to discuss
them with the employee. ROI at 111. The IPO averred that, although he asked Complainant to
prioritize completion of work requirements before working on awards, Complainant refused to
do so. ROI at 111. The IPO averred that the IMO initiated the semi-annual request for award
nominations on May 15, 2020, with a deadline of May 25, 2020. ROI at 111-12. Regarding
awards, the IPO stated that Complainant told him she intended to submit two award nominations
and ultimately submitted three nominations, and he estimated it would take two hours to create
one award nomination. ROI at 111. According to the IPO, he asked Complainant for input
regarding a deadline for completing the distance learning courses based on Complainant’s
concern that he was approaching her subordinates directly. ROI at 110.
                                                6                                    2021004223

Complainant alleged that, because the IPO’s actions diminished her effectiveness as a supervisor,
she requested a transfer to a non-supervisory position in another department to escape the
harassment and, on June 15, 2020, she transferred to another department under a new supervisor.
ROI at 65. Complainant averred that the IPO not only condoned her subordinates’ use of a sexist
term, but also relayed that sex-based opinion to their supervisor, allowing the problem to fester
and creating a hostile work environment for her. ROI at 68. Complainant stated that her desk was
directly outside the IPO’s office, so she would see the IPO call one of her subordinates into his
office and close the door. ROI at 82. According to Complainant, the IPO assigned her
subordinates work and the act of closing the door right in front of her was disrespectful and
intended to exclude her from overseeing the work of her subordinates. ROI at 82.

On May 31, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the bases of sex (female) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, as
recently as March 5, 2020, she was subjected to a hostile work environment characterized by, but
not limited to, management using the term “mothering” about her and management increasing
her workload.

On July 5, 2020, the Agency dismissed Complainant’s complaint for failure to state a claim and
for untimely EEO counselor contact. On appeal, the Commission reversed that Agency’s final
decision dismissing Complainant’s complaint, finding that Complainant timely initiated EEO
contact and that her EEO complaint stated a hostile work environment claim. Opal V. v. Dep’t of
State, EEOC Appeal No. 2020004444 (Oct. 8, 2020).

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). On April 19, 2021, Complainant requested
the issuance of a final decision by the Agency.

In an April 19, 2021 letter accompanying her request for a final decision, Complainant stated that
there were omissions from the record that would need to be addressed before a decision could be
made. Complainant asserted that Subordinate-2 was a key witness and should have been
contacted during the investigation. Based on the EEO counselor’s report, Complainant suggested
that Subordinate-3 may have used another sexually demeaning term to complain about her to the
IPO and that Subordinate-3 also should have been interviewed. Finally, while Complainant noted
that HR-1 correctly stated that she had not complained to him about any issues related to her
subordinates or about any harassment, she stated that she did complain to HR-2, who should
have been interviewed during the EEO investigation.

The record contains April 22-27, 2021, email correspondence between Complainant, her non-
attorney representative, and an Agency EEO Specialist about Complainant’s April 19, 2021,
letter concerning the omissions from the investigative record. The Agency did not conduct a
supplemental investigation in response to Complainant’s concerns.
                                                7                                    2021004223

In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision on June 3, 2021,
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Regarding Complainant’s reprisal allegation, the Agency
found that Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to an adverse action because
the tasks she was assigned in May 2020 were either routine duties or incidental to her position,
should not have taken a long time to complete, and the deadlines were reasonable under the
circumstances. The Agency also found that Complainant failed to establish a nexus between her
EEO activity and the alleged increase in her workload. The Agency therefore concluded that
Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of reprisal.

Considering Complainant’s harassment claim, the Agency found that Complainant was a
member of a protected class. However, the Agency determined that the record was devoid of any
harassment directed at Complainant by management because of her sex. The final decision noted
that the IPO did not use the term himself and repeated the term as used by Subordinate-1 and
Subordinate-2 in complaining about Complainant’s supervisory style. The Agency found that the
record demonstrated that the term was only used by the IPO once, that, when Complainant
objected to the term in her February 24 memo, the IPO reported it immediately to the IMO and
to HR-1, and that Subordinate-1 apologized to Complainant at the meeting. According to the
Agency, there was no evidence in the record that Subordinate-1 or Subordinate-2 ever used any
other language or engaged in conduct that could be deemed demeaning or disrespectful towards
women. Regarding Complainant’s claim that she was excluded from assigning work to her
subordinates, the Agency found that there was nothing in the record suggesting that the IPO, as
their second-level supervisor, did not have the authority to assign them work. The Agency
determined that, because the “mothering” term was only used once by the IPO and
Complainant’s other allegations were trivial at best, no reasonable person would consider these
actions to constitute a hostile work environment.

The Agency determined that there was nothing in the record showing that any alleged actions by
the IPO were based on Complainant’s sex, noting that the IPO only used the term “mothering” to
describe the complaints from Subordinate-1 or Subordinate-2 and that there was no evidence that
the IPO “allowed the use of the term to continue or that no action was taken by management.”
Final Agency Decision (FAD) at 26. The Agency further determined that the alleged harassment
was insufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment. The Agency
cited the IPO, who stated that he was unaware of any change in Complainant’s work
performance as a result of the alleged harassment. According to the Agency, even if Complainant
could establish that she was subjected to harassment, there was no basis for imputing liability to
the Agency. The Agency determined that, after Complainant objected to the use of the term
“mothering” on February 24, 2020, the IPO held a meeting the next day. The Agency also noted
that mediation was held after Complainant filed her EEO complaint, describing changes that
allegedly came about as a result of mediation. FAD at 29. The Agency therefore found that
nothing in the record suggested that management ignored Complainant’s claims of harassment.
The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination as alleged.

The instant appeal followed.
                                                8                                     2021004223

On appeal, Complainant contends that the IPO undermined her authority with her subordinates
and condoned sexist comments and attitudes directed against her because of her sex. According
to Complainant, the Agency’s final decision incorrectly stated that she received a written
apology from the IPO. Complainant also argues that the Agency failed to address the serious
omissions from the investigative record she raised, which led to an inaccurate final decision.
Complainant asserts that the record is clear that the IPO received complaints from Subordinate-1
and Subordinate-2 about her “mothering” them as well as a complaint from Subordinate-3 using
similar language, that, for months, the IPO failed to take any corrective action for several
months, allowing Complainant’s subordinates to bypass her and creating a hostile work
environment, and that the IPO only addressed the issue when HR became involved.

The Agency did not submit a statement or brief in response to Complainant’s appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard
of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Adequacy of the Investigative Record

As a preliminary matter, we address Complainant’s contentions that the record is inadequate.

We note the record does have some omissions. In particular, the EEO investigator failed to
obtain and include affidavits from several important witnesses, including Subordinate-2,
Subordinate-3, HR-2, and the IMO. The EEO investigator requested an affidavit from the IMO,
who refused to provide one. Federal employees are required to provide evidence the EEO
investigator provides necessary, so a responding management like the IMO official cannot
decide that he does not know any relevant information and refuse to provide an investigative
affidavit. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(c)(1). The Agency has not responded to Complainant’s appeal to
address the IMO’s failure to provide an affidavit or the other deficiencies with the record raised
by Complainant.

Despite the identified deficiencies with the EEO investigation, upon review, we find that the
record is adequately developed for the finder of fact to determine whether Complainant was
subjected to harassment based on sex and/or reprisal as alleged.
                                                 9                                     2021004223

Harassment

Complainant alleged that she was subjected to harassment based on sex and reprisal. To establish
a claim of harassment a complainant must show that: (1) they belong to a statutorily protected
class; (2) they were subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical
conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on their
statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).
Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). The harasser’s conduct should be evaluated from the
objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim’s circumstances. Enforcement
Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994).

Reprisal claims are considered with a broad view of coverage. See Burlington Northern and
Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 67-68 (2006); see also, Carroll v. Dep’t of the Army,
EEOC Request No. 05970939 (Apr. 4, 2000). Retaliatory actions which can be challenged are
not restricted to those which affect a term or condition of employment. Id. Rather, a complainant
is protected from any discrimination that is reasonably likely to deter protected activity. Id.; see
also, Carroll, supra. To ultimately prevail on a claim of retaliatory harassment, Complainant
must show that she was subjected to conduct sufficient to dissuade a “reasonable person” from
making or supporting a charge of discrimination. See Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Ry. Co.
v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related
Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, § II(B)(3) & n. 137 (Aug. 25, 2016).

As a preliminary matter, we note that, upon learning of Complainant’s allegation of harassment,
the IPO consulted HR-1, who told him that, because he did not think the allegation amounted to
a hostile work environment, no further action was needed. 3 However, we note that the Agency’s
harassment policy requires management to respond to all allegations of discriminatory
harassment, not only those allegations of harassment that the Deputy Human Resources Officer
considers to be legally actionable.




3
  The Agency’s final decision appeared to conclude that allowing Complainant to pursue the
EEO process regarding her allegations and participating in the mediation of her EEO complaint
constituted corrective action. However, the Agency’s obligation to address harassment is
separate from a complainant’s right to file an EEO complaint. Further, to the extent the IPO
attempted to introduce the Agency’s mediation offers as evidence of corrective action, we note,
“Settlement negotiations, including any statements or proposals, are to be treated as confidential
and privileged to facilitate a candid interchange to settle disputes informally.” Harris v. Dep’t of
the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05941002 (Mar. 23, 1995).
                                               10                                   2021004223

The Agency’s Discriminatory Harassment Policy states that the Agency is committed to
providing a workplace that is free from discriminatory harassment and encourages employees
who believe they are being harassed or who witness potential harassment “to report the offending
conduct so that it can be stopped before it becomes severe or pervasive and rises to a possible
violation of law.” ROI at 201-05.

Complainant alleged that she was subjected to discriminatory harassment based on sex when, in
response to her subordinates complaining that she was “mothering” them, the IPO allowed her
subordinates to bypass her and assigned them work directly. Complainant has established
element (1) based on her membership in a protected class. It is undisputed that two of
Complainant’s male subordinates, Subordinate-1 and Subordinate-2 complained to the IPO that
Complainant was “mothering” them. 4 Although it appears that Subordinate-1’s intention was to
convey dissatisfaction with Complainant’s supervisory style, we will assume for the purposes of
this decision that the use of “mothering” was based on Complainant’s sex and that Complainant
established elements (2) and (3).

We do not find, however, that Complainant established element (4), that the harassment affected
a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment. In response to the complaints of Subordinate-1, Subordinate-2, and Subordinate-3
about Complainant’s supervisory style, the IPO contacted HR-1 to ask if he could assign work
directly to Complainant’s subordinates. HR-1 informed the IPO that he could assign work
directly to any subordinate employee within his section when necessary and in the interest of
meeting current customer and job demands. The IPO subsequently directly assigned some work
to Subordinate-1, Subordinate-2, and Subordinate-3, and the IPO conceded that sometimes he
did not inform Complainant about assigning work to her subordinates until after the fact.
However, the record does not reflect that this practice affected Complainant’s performance. In
his January 31, 2020, memorandum for the record, the IPO stated that he told Complainant that
she was a good supervisor, that she would receive a “good” evaluation, and that he expected that
she would be a good IPO at her next post. ROI at 118-19. We also do not find that the alleged
harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment.
Complainant did not directly hear any of her subordinates use the term “mothering,” and the IPO
explained that he used the term during the January 31 meeting to convey the specific details of
her subordinates’ concerns. Moreover, we do not find that the use of the term “mothering” is
sufficiently severe on its own to violate Title VII. Accordingly, Complainant has not established
by preponderant evidence in the record that she was subjected to discriminatory harassment as
alleged.




4
  Because the EEO investigator failed to request an affidavit from Subordinate-3, obtain
documentary evidence regarding Subordinate-3’s complaints, or ask other witnesses such as the
IPO about the nature of Subordinate-3’s complaints, it is not clear whether Subordinate-3 used
language related to Complainant’s sex.
                                               11                                   2021004223

Complainant also alleged harassment with respect to management increasing her workload in
mid-May 2020 by giving her assignments with unreasonable deadlines, including asking her to
discuss her work requirements with the IPO, to draft work requirements and discuss them with
her subordinates, to draft award nominations, to provide input to the IPO on training
requirements, to disseminate the training requirements to her subordinates, and to complete the
training. We do not find that Complainant established that these assignments constituted
harassment.

The preponderance of the evidence in the record reflects that the work requirements were annual
tasks that were due within 45 days of the start of the new performance appraisal period on April
16, 2020. These assignments were part of Complainant’s regular job duties already pending
when the IPO emailed Complainant on May 13, 2020, and the IPO estimated that it would take
approximately one hour to draft one subordinate’s work requirements, enter the work
requirements into the system, and discuss the work requirements with the subordinate. Similarly,
the IMO’s request regarding awards was related to the regular, semiannual call for award
nominations, and the record does not reflect that it would take Complainant long to draft the
nominations. Complainant submitted three nominations, and the IPO estimated that it would take
approximately six hours to draft three nominations. The IPO wanted the IPC section to complete
distance learning training because he said they had less work in May 2020 because of the Covid-
19 pandemic. The IPO asked Complainant for input setting deadlines for the training and to
communicate the training requirements to her subordinates because Complainant indicated that
she did not want the IPO to bypass her and task her subordinates directly. While Complainant
asserted that their workload was actually higher at that time because they were on maximum
telework and could only perform certain duties while physically in the office, she did not
communicate these concerns to the IPO and did not provide any feedback about the training
deadlines or communicate the requirements to her subordinates. We find that there is no
evidence in the record that these assignments were based on Complainant’s sex and/or prior
protected EEO activity. Accordingly, Complainant has not established that she was subjected to
discriminatory harassment with respect to her increased workload.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                                12                                    2021004223

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                               13                                    2021004223

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 20, 2023
Date
