             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         John M., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                     Thomas J. Vilsack,
                                         Secretary,
                                  Department of Agriculture
                          (Natural Resources Conservation Service),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2022001985

                               Agency No. FPAC-2021-00381

                                         DECISION

On March 1, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
February 10, 2022 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a District
Conservationist, GS-0457-11, at the Agency’s Service Center in Gate City, Virginia.

On August 3, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, on April 5, 2021, management
excluded Complainant from an email which identified and notified eligible candidates of an
opportunity to apply for a temporary promotion to a GS-12 District Conservationist position in
Wytheville, Virginia.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2022001985

Complainant named his supervisor, the Assistant State Conservationist (S1), as the responsible
management official for the alleged discrimination. The record shows that on April 5, 2021, S1
sent an email to all of the District Conservationists within his administrative area of
responsibility, except Complainant and one other employee, notifying them about a temporary
promotion opportunity to the vacant GS-12 District Conservationist position in Wytheville,
Virginia. The other person who was not sent the email was the person who was vacating the
position that was being advertised. Complainant averred he was intentionally left out as an act of
retaliation. He had previously named S1 as a responsible management official in a prior EEO
complaint that he filed on October 18, 2019. A co-worker supported Complainant’s contention
that the omission was intentional.

S1 denied retaliating against Complainant and stated that the omission was an oversight. S1
affirmed that whenever there is a vacant District Conservationist job, the State Office sends out
an email to every employee in the state of Virginia to see if there are any candidates. S1 averred
that before the State Office sent out its email, he sent the email to all employees within his area
of responsibility. S1 also averred that he did not know Complainant had any interest in the short-
term position in Wytheville until he was told about the EEO complaint.

The State Office sent out the notice four months later. Complainant could have applied, but he
did not apply.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final Agency
decision. The Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b) in which it
found that Complainant was not subjected to reprisal as alleged. This appeal followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is usually examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated
in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).
                                                 3                                     2022001985

For Complainant to prevail, he or she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S.
248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson
Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S.
502, 519 (1993); Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

In this case, assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of reprisal, S1
articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for his actions. S1 stated it was an oversight
and that Complainant had not expressed an interest in the position at issue. S1 added that the
State Office subsequently sent out an announcement for the same position to every employee in
Virginia, including Complainant, and Complainant chose not to apply.

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency's stated reason is merely a
pretext for discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6,
1996). Complainant can do this directly by showing that the Agency's proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

As Complainant did not request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's final credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the
Commission can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. The
Commission finds no persuasive evidence that Complainant's prior protected EEO activity was a
factor in the Agency's action. At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency's reasons were not the real
reasons and that the Agency acted on the basis of retaliatory animus. Complainant failed to carry
this burden. A s a result, the Commission finds that Complainant has not established that he was
subjected to reprisal as alleged.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                4                                     2022001985

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                5                                    2022001985

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 8, 2023
Date
