              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           James R., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Gina M. Raimondo,
                                           Secretary,
                                    Department of Commerce
                                     (Bureau of the Census),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022002138

                                  Agency No. 63-2020-01165D


                                           DECISION

On March 13, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
March 3, 2022, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of
1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the matter for a supplemental
investigation.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Census Field
Supervisor, AD-0303-00, at the Agency’s Area Census Office (ACO) in Traverse City, Michigan.
Complainant is a white Caucasian. The identified responsible management officials (RMOs) were
aware of Complainant’s race and color from observation. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 101.

Management terminated Complainant’s employment on September 18, 2020.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                     2022002138

On October 9, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him and subjected him to a hostile work environment on the bases of race (Caucasian),
color (White), and age (unspecified). Complainant’s allegations are stated as follows.

   1. Whether management subjected Complainant to harassment and a hostile work
      environment when:

       a. On September 19, 2020, Area Manager (RMO 1) accused Complainant of having
          violated Census policy by using his personal funds to reimburse an employee who
          traveled 130 miles to attend a training that she was not permitted to attend;

       b. On September 19, 2020, RMO 1 sent Complainant an email stating he was only
          permitted at the ACO when the workload called for it and at this time he was not needed
          at the ACO. If there were items he needed from the ACO, his Chief Financial Manager
          (CFM) could coordinate a way to get them to him;

       c. On an unspecified date, an employee from the Information Technology (IT [RMO 2])
          office chased Complainant around the office harassingly telling him to "run" after
          RMO 1 threatened over the speakerphone to call U.S. Marshals on Complainant;

       d. On September 24, 2020, Administrative Manager (RMO 3) sent Complainant an email
          stating the U.S. Census was separating him due to his no call, no shows; since
          September 18, 2020, which it considered job abandonment; and

       e. On multiple unspecified dates, Complainant’s training sessions were monitored by a
          witness (Witness 1) from IT, and he was instructed to change his training method for
          accessing the iPhone;

   2. Whether management discriminated against Complainant when on September 18, 2020,
      Complainant was terminated.

The Agency conducted an investigation into the complaint. At the conclusion of the investigation,
the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation (ROI) and notice of
his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), on March 3, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision (FAD)
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that
the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

This appeal followed.
                                               3                                       2022002138

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, among other things, Complainant contests the FAD, expressing his belief that key
points were missed; and asking that the evidence be reexamined. Complainant also reiterates his
allegations, itemizing 12 assertions, to buttress his position.

Complainant also criticizes the EEO process, arguing that the record was inadequately developed.

The Agency did not submit an appeal statement.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Inadequately Developed Record

We find that Complainant raised serious allegations indicating that he was subjected to severe or
pervasive physical and verbal conduct. However, we determine that the record in this case has not
been adequately developed because none of the managers Complainant identified as having
engaged in the alleged conduct or Complainant’s coworkers who may have witnessed the conduct
provided testimony.

Regarding Claims 1a through e, the record contains an email dated September 20, 2020, which
indicates that Complainant and another employee made a trip to the ACO without prior notice and
approval. Complainant alleged that RMO 2 and RMO 3 became confrontational when he
requested reimbursement after he issued a check to the other employee to cover her travel
expenses. Complainant believed that his action was typical for supervisors. ROI at 102. They
also allegedly failed to provide him with a copy of the Agency policy that served as basis for their
denial of his reimbursement request. Complainant asserted that an employee overheard the
conversation in the break room and indicated to Complainant that, "I don't think anyone should be
treated like that." ROI at 104. Complainant also alleged that he was then relieved of his
supervisory duties without explanation.

According to Complainant, management posted his picture on the door and prevented his entry to
the building when he came to return his equipment. ROI at 103. He asserted that no one outside
his protected bases received such treatment. Id. Complainant alleged that RMOs 2 and 3
threatened to call law enforcement on him, and that RMO 1 advised him to run. ROI at 104.
                                              4                                     2022002138


Complainant asserted that management asked that he change his training methods, but no other
individuals were asked to do so. Complainant also stated that management treated the IT
department more favorably than he was, adding that his race and color played a factor because the
harassment started with a named witness (Witness 1), who is Black. ROI at 106-07.

The Supreme Court has held an employer who creates or tolerates a work environment which is
permeated with "discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult" that is sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the terms and conditions of an individual's employment and which creates an
abusive work environment is in violation of Title VII. Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S.
17 (1993), citing Meritor Savings Bank F.S.B. v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57 (1986). We find, based on
the incidents as described by Complainant’s, that Complainant alleged that he was subjected to
conduct that was severe or pervasive to alter the terms and conditions of his employment.

Regarding Claim 2, Complainant was subjected to a tangible employment action when his
employment was terminated. Management asserted that Complainant was terminated for
inappropriate and unacceptable workplace behavior, some of which was sexually explicit.
However, none of the managers involved in making Complainant’s termination determination
were interviewed. Rather, the record includes Exhibit 13 which the Agency in its FAD described
as management's history of Complainant's conduct and performance (Documentation of Conduct).
ROI at 130-43. The Agency listed the reasons for Complainant’s termination as follows:

   1. On September 16, 2020, Complainant was charged with insubordination for failing to carry
      out orders and inappropriate behavior on the workplace.

   2. On September 17, 2020, a coworker reported that Complainant gave her a teddy bear. The
      Coworker felt uncomfortable and informed Management.

Further, the Agency asserted, Complainant was terminated for:

   3. Intimidating behavior towards multiple employees at the ACO and refusal to leave despite
      being directed by the ADM and ACOM;

   4. Buying a teddy bear for a female coworker;

   5. Sexually explicit comment toward a separate female employee;

   6. Sharing of a sexually-explicit photo to an employee of his during work hours; and

   7. Refusal to be in touch or respond to Census calls the last 48 hours, thus abandoning his
      duties as a CFS.

ROI at 135.
                                              5                                      2022002138

Complainant did state that he did not tell Management that he felt harassed or that he thought his
termination resulted from racial bias. ROI at 105. Complainant himself also stated that
Management terminated nine out of ten trainers. ROI at 106. However, we find that the
investigative record with respect to the allegations that formed the bases of Complainant’s
termination was not adequately developed. None of the RMOs and identified witnesses provided
testimonies. Specifically, the record is devoid of any evidence that the management officials who
made the determination to terminate Complainant’s employment were interviewed.

Also missing from the record are affidavits from the employee for whom Complainant bought a
teddy bear, the employee to whom he allegedly made sexually explicit comment and the employee
with whom Complainant allegedly shared a sexually-explicit photo. None of these employees
were interviewed during the investigation. These employees and any witnesses to Complainant’s
alleged actions should have provided testimony under oath.

The investigator stated that the identified RMOs and witnesses declined to participate in the
investigation. ROI at 351. However, that the alleged RMOs and identified witnesses were no
longer with the Agency at the time of the EEO investigation does not mean they cannot be
compelled to participate in it. The Commission is unable to make a decision without relevant
witness affidavits or testimony. 2

Since none of the identified RMOs and witnesses were interviewed as part of the investigation, it
is Complainant’s word against the statements included in the Agency’s FAD. Given
Complainant’s assertions of a discriminatory environment created by the alleged RMOs which, if
true, would likely have been witnessed by Complainant’s coworkers or staff at the facility, none
of whom were interviewed as part of the investigation, we find that the investigation was
inadequate in this case.

Accordingly, we remand this complaint to the Agency for further investigation to supplement the
record. We ask that the investigator interview all the RMOs and CFSs who worked at the Chicago
Regional Center, Traverse, Michigan office, including but not limited to the witnesses identified
by Complainant. The investigation should uncover whether those witnesses had ever observed the
alleged RMOs take discriminatory action against Complainant. The investigation should also
uncover the veracity of the reasons for Complainant’s termination.


2
  Agencies and Complainants each have a duty to cooperate with the investigator during the
investigation. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b). Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b), a party to a
complaint - the complainant as well as the agency - may be subject to sanctions where it fails
without good cause shown to respond fully and in a timely fashion to a request of the investigator
for documents, records, comparative data, statistics, affidavits, or the attendance of witnesses.
Such is the situation in the instant complaint. At the very least, the Agency could have drawn an
adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony of the responsible management
officials (RMOs) , the requested witnesses, would have reflected unfavorably on the RMOs and
the Agency. See EEO MD-110, Chap. 12, § VI, (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                             6                                      2022002138

Finally, we require that the investigator have the RMOs testify, under oath, regarding the
comments and conduct attributed to them by Complainant.

                                        CONCLUSION

Therefore, after a careful review of the record, including Complainant's arguments on appeal and
evidence not specifically discussed in this decision, the Commission VACATESthe Agency's final
decision and REMANDS the matter to the Agency in accordance with this decision and the Order
below.

                                            ORDER

   1. Within 45 days of receipt of this order, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
      investigation, to include the following actions:

           a. Obtain testimony from RMO 1, RMO 2, and RMO 3 under oath, regarding the
              alleged incidents in Claims 1a through 1e, in particular, whether management
              posted Complainant’s picture on the door, barred his entry into the building or
              threatened to call law enforcement on Complainant;

           b. Obtain sworn affidavits from Complainant’s coworkers, including Witness 1 and
              the employee who overheard the conversation in the break room, regarding whether
              they witnessed or heard management threaten to call law enforcement on
              Complainant or take any of the alleged actions in Claims 1a through 1e;

           c. Obtain sworn affidavits from any other employees in the Traverse, Michigan office
              who worked with Complainant during the time in question. Each coworker shall
              be asked whether he or she witnessed or heard about the incidents Complainant
              alleged occurred in Claims 1a through 1e;

           d. Obtain sworn affidavits from any of the management officials involved in making
              the determination that resulted in Complainant’s termination as alleged in Claim 2;

           e. Obtain a sworn affidavit from the employee for whom Complainant allegedly
              bought a teddy bear as alleged in Claim 2;

           f. Obtain sworn affidavits from Complainant’s employee(s) to whom he allegedly
              made sexually explicit comments and/or with whom he shared a sexually explicit
              photo;

           g. Obtain sworn affidavits from any witness who confirms that they saw or heard any
              kind of sexually explicit comment that Complainant made to any employee; and
              whether they reported those comments to management or whether they were aware
              that anyone else reported such comments to management.
                                              7                                       2022002138

   2. Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant with a
       copy of the supplemental record and findings and return the completed record to the
       Compliance Officer, as referenced below. The Complainant may, within fifteen (15) days
       of receipt of the supplemental record, submit a statement concerning the supplemental
       record to the Compliance Officer. Upon receipt by the Compliance Officer, the
       supplemental record will be included in the appeal file and the appeal will be processed
       appropriately.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                               8                                        2022002138

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title.
                                                 9                                        2022002138

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means
the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                           Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 16, 2023
Date
