             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Jeannie T., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Thomas J. Vilsack,
                                         Secretary,
                                  Department of Agriculture,
                                          Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022000210

                                Agency No. FPAC-2021-00036

                                          DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s September 15, 2021, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision finding no discrimination.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a National Volunteer
Program Manager, GS-12, at the Agency’s Farm Production and Conservation Business Center
in Washington, DC.

On December 3, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
her to discrimination and harassment based on sex (female) and in reprisal for prior protected
EEO activity under when:

       1.     On or around October 2, 2020, management notified Complainant that her duties
              would be reduced, and Complainant’s responsibilities as the National Program
              Manager would be removed; and


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2022000210

       2.      On several dates, Complainant was subjected to various incidents of harassment,
               including but not limited to:
               a. On September 28, 2020, Complainant’s male colleague made an inappropriate
                   sexual comment towards her during a live video meeting; and
               b. On September 30, 2020, Complainant’s supervisor failed to act after she
                   notified him of the inappropriate sexual comment towards her, and
                   subsequently indicated to Complainant that filing an Administrative
                   Grievance would be a distraction in the workplace.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge. Complainant requested a final Agency decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b).

On or about August 10, 2021, Complainant received a signed decision that appeared to be the
Agency’s final action in this matter. That decision concluded Complainant had been subjected to
discrimination and sexual harassment but included no discussion of remedies. After receiving
the Agency’s decision finding discrimination, Complainant informed the Agency that it had
improperly failed to award any relief. On September 15, 2021, the Agency issued two decisions,
one rescinding its first decision finding discrimination and the other addressing the merits of the
complaint and finding no discrimination. Both of the September 15, 2021 decisions were sent to
Complainant without signature. The Agency’s rescission indicated that an EEO specialist had
written an initial draft decision for review with a finding of discrimination. Upon review, it was
determined the facts did not support that conclusion, and the draft was returned to an EEO
specialist who then rewrote the decision to find no discrimination. However, according to the
Agency, an administrative error occurred that resulted in the initial draft decision being issued to
Complainant on August 10, 2021, instead of the correct final decision finding no discrimination.
The September 15, 2021 decision on the merits concluded that Complainant failed to prove that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed. During this
appeal, the Agency submitted copies of both September 15, 2021, decisions that were signed and
dated.

In its revised final decision, the Agency outlined the factual background of Complainant’s
claims. On September 28, 2020, Complainant was on a video meeting to test new software.
During that meeting, the contractor demonstrating the software indicated he would impersonate
Complainant’s account for the purposes of the demonstration. Complainant’s male coworker
(CW1) replied, “Yeah but I’m sure you don’t look as good as she does.” Following CW1’s
comment, several individuals on the call laughed loudly and another contractor said, “Oh, I sure
hope not.” One of the team members in Complainant’s program, Executive Program Manager
(CW2), spoke after the laughter had subsided but did not respond to CW1’s comment. The next
day, Complainant reported the comment to CW2 and said it constituted sexual harassment.
Complainant also emailed CW1 to tell him his remark had made her uncomfortable and violated
Agency policy.
                                                3                                     2022000210

CW1 agreed his remark was unprofessional, and he apologized. CW1 offered to remove himself
from a committee in which he worked with Complainant, but she replied that she accepted his
apology and that the issue was resolved.

After Complainant had reported her concerns of sexual harassment to CW2, CW2 informed
Complainant’s supervisor, Section Chief, who immediately called Complainant and left her a
voicemail. Section Chief averred that he also called his own supervisor to make him aware of
Complainant’s allegation. Section Chief later spoke with Complainant by phone the next
morning on September 30, 2020, where, according to the supervisor, he explained Complainant’s
options. Section Chief admitted he told Complainant that “it is always good to manage the case
at the lowest level possible,” but said he informed her of other options and sent her an email that
contained contact information and links to filing a complaint and seeking employee assistance.
Complainant, however, stated that her supervisor told her that filing such a claim would be a
“distraction.” The supervisor denied saying this.

Complainant averred that two days later, on October 2, 2020, her supervisor called an impromptu
meeting, with CW2 also present. Complainant stated that her supervisor informed her that CW2
would provide program leadership going forward and that Complainant’s duties would be
“operational.” Complainant averred that during this meeting her supervisor described her new
duties as being akin to that of the program coordinator to whom Complainant provided daily
supervision. Specifically, Complainant stated that the duties taken away from her as National
Program Manager and given to CW2 included: developing and managing the program budget,
providing leadership oversight to the program, directing the program at the national level, and
setting work priorities and objectives for the national program. The next week, on October 8,
2020, Complainant emailed the supervisor, summarizing her understanding of the October 2
meeting, including that “[CW2] has executive management authority of program and will
perform all leadership functions. My role will be operational.” The email also listed the duties
mentioned above that were previously assigned to Complainant but now fell under CW2’s
position. In response to the email, her supervisor said, “Yes, I’m asking you and [other program
team member] to run things through [CW2] as Executive Program Manager. In turn, [CW2] is
tasked with keeping you, [other program team member], and me informed.”

The Agency found that, regarding claim 1, Complainant’s supervisor had articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for his actions. Complainant’s supervisor denied that Complainant’s
duties were reduced or her responsibilities as National Program Manager were removed. The
supervisor indicated that Complainant continued to be introduced as “National Program
Manager.” He also averred that Complainant continued to conduct national meetings and had
developed a steering committee with high-level executives. The supervisor explained that the
only changes he made involved how the program team communicated with him. He sought to
coordinate the three members’ communications to him because he had been receiving multiple
different versions of documents from the team members, which caused delays. In rebutting the
supervisor’s affidavit, Complainant pointed to the fact that in responding to the email she sent
him summarizing her understanding of her reduced duties, his response said “Yes” and did not
indicate that Complainant had misunderstood.
                                                  4                                     2022000210

The supervisor insisted that he was only asking for everyone on the team to coordinate prior to
sending him final documents for approval. The Agency found Complainant did not rebut the
supervisor’s reasons as pretextual.

Regarding claim 2, the Agency found that the remark by CW1 constituted harassment but that
there was no basis for imputing liability to the Agency because Complainant’s supervisor
addressed Complainant’s concerns once the issue was brought to his attention and provided her
with all of her options on how she could proceed.

The Agency therefore found that, based on the above, Complainant failed to show that the
Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination or reprisal or that she was subjected to a
hostile work environment.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

As an initial matter, we address the two Agency decisions issued in this case. Based on our
review of the record, we find that the totality of the circumstances shows that the initial Agency
decision finding discrimination, dated August 10, 2021, was sent in error and was never meant to
be a final decision (as evidenced by the fact that it did not address the issue of relief or award any
remedies). We also find that the Agency’s subsequent rescission and revised final decision were
properly issued and constitute the Agency’s final action in this matter.

Complainant argues on appeal that the first decision finding discrimination is binding on the
Agency and should be the operative final decision in this case. First, Complainant contends that
the Agency’s subsequent rescission and final decision finding no discrimination did not contain
the necessary elements of final Agency decisions because they were issued to her unsigned.
Complainant therefore argues that because the first decision contained a signature while the
rescission and new decision did not, the rescission is invalid, and the first decision should be
deemed official and binding on the Agency. We note, however, that on appeal the Agency
provided copies of the rescission and new decision that were both signed by the same individual
who signed the first decision (which found discrimination) and contained the proper date stamp.
                                                5                                    2022000210

Second, Complainant argues our prior cases have held that when an agency makes a finding of
discrimination, it is bound by that finding. See Rousseau v. Dep’t of Educ., EEOC Appeal No.
01920410 (January 21, 1992); Davis v. Dep’t of Just., EEOC Request No. 05931205 (Sept. 1,
1994). Complainant’s reliance on these cases is misplaced, however. These opinions, and later
cases citing them, involved circumstances where the agency decision finding discrimination had
already been appealed by complainant and/or was under the Commission’s jurisdiction at the
time the agency sought to rescind its finding of discrimination. See, e.g., Angelo P. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Sec., EEOC Request No. 2021003833 (May 2, 2022) (citing Brewer v. Dep’t of the
Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01972835 (Feb. 22, 2000)). Our prior cases, therefore, sought to
prevent agencies from relitigating their own findings of discrimination on appeal. Here,
Complainant did not file an appeal with the Commission until after the Agency had rescinded its
prior decision finding discrimination and had issued a revised final decision finding no
discrimination.

Because we have found that the first Agency decision finding discrimination was issued due to a
clerical error and that the rescission and revised decision were valid, we next address
Complainant’s claims on the merits.

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as claim 1, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
Complainant was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would
support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978).
Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981).

Once the Agency has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade
the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s explanation was pretextual.
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v.
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993). Complainant can do this by showing that the proffered explanations
were unworthy of credence or that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the Agency.
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256. A showing that the employer’s articulated reasons were not credible
permits, but does not compel, a finding of discrimination. Hicks, 509 U.S. at 511.

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis: the ultimate issue of whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Serv. Bd.
of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC
Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., EEOC
                                                6                                    2022000210

Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Petition No.
03900056 (May 31, 1990).

Regarding Complainant’s claim that some of her duties were reduced or removed, the record
does not contradict the supervisor’s contention that Complainant’s duties were not meaningfully
changed. While Complainant points to the email she received from the supervisor as an
indication that several of her responsibilities as National Program Manager were given to CW2,
the email in fact only mentions Complainant and another coworker “run[ning] things through
[CW2],” and does not indicate that Complainant’s role would be diminished. Further,
Complainant has not provided any evidence showing that she had little responsibilities at work,
that she was rarely assigned tasks, or was left out of decision-making processes/conversations;
nor does she dispute the supervisor’s statement that she continued to conduct national meetings
and had developed a steering committee of high-level executives. We therefore find that
Complainant has failed to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the supervisor’s
explanation was pretext for discrimination or reprisal.

To establish a claim of harassment, Complainant must establish that: (1) Complainant belongs to
a statutorily protected class; (2) Complainant was subjected to harassment in the form of
unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on Complainant’s statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment
affected a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of
Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982).

Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of
[complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift
Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993); see also Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 23 U.S. 75
(1998). The harasser’s conduct should be evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the victim’s circumstances. Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc.,
EEOC Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994).

Therefore, to prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to
conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in her position
would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the
conduct was taken because of a protected basis. Only if Complainant establishes both of those
elements, hostility and motive, will the question of Agency liability present itself.

We find that even if the one comment made by CW1 occurred as alleged, which the Agency
appears to concede, it was not sufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a claim of
harassment. A single comment referencing Complainant’s appearance, without more, does not
rise to the level of a hostile work environment.
                                               7                                    2022000210

Complainant’s claim of harassment must therefore fail. See, e.g., Delphia F. v. Dep’t of the
Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 2020000137 (Feb. 9, 2021) (Commission found claim that a
supervisor referred to complainant as “my dear” during a meeting was insufficiently severe or
pervasive); Owen M. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120161409 (May 3, 2018)
(Commission found claim that an acting supervisor said “suck my dick” to complainant twice
during a conversation was insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish sexual harassment or a
hostile work environment). EEO laws are not a civility code. Rather, they forbid “only behavior
so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim’s employment.” Oncale, 523 U.S.
at 81.

Although constructive discharge was not an accepted claim in the complaint, we note that in its
final decision the Agency in a footnote stated that Complainant alleged she was forced to leave
her position due to harassment and discrimination and indicated it would address the question of
whether management had constructively discharged Complainant. The Agency ultimately found
no discrimination on the entire complaint. Because we also find no discrimination, we find that
Complainant cannot establish discriminatory constructive discharge.

Lastly, we address the portion of claim 2b that alleges Complainant’s supervisor indicated to her
that filing a grievance would be a distraction in the workplace. Comments that, on their face,
discourage an employee from participating in the EEO process violate the letter and spirit of the
EEOC regulations and evidence a per se violation of the law. Binseel v. Dep’t of the Army,
EEOC Request No. 05970584 (Oct. 8, 1998) (complainant was told that filing an EEO suit was
the wrong way to go about getting a promotion). Here, the supervisor denied saying that filing a
claim would be a distraction, but he admitted he told her that it is best to resolve cases at the
lowest level and stated he provided information about filing a complaint. Even in light of the
supervisor’s admission, we find that the supervisor’s behavior was not reasonably likely to deter
Complainant from participating in the EEO process and therefore does not constitute a per se
violation.

Based on a thorough review of the record, considering all statements submitted on appeal, we
find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination
or retaliation as she alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination or retaliation is AFFIRMED.
                                                  8                                 2022000210

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                9                                     2022000210

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 20, 2023
Date
