              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Zachary K., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Janet L. Yellen,
                                           Secretary,
                                   Department of the Treasury,
                                            Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2022004702

                                   Agency No. BFS-22-0217-F

                                           DECISION

On September 1, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 2, 2022, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Supervisory
Accountant at the Agency’s Program Support Division in Parkersburg, West Virginia.

On March 10, 2022, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the basis of disability (adult attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder, anxiety,
depression, and obsessive/compulsive disorder) when, on or about November 9, 2021,
Supervisory Program Manager and first-level Supervisor informed him that she planned to
terminate his temporary promotion and return him to his permanent GS-13 position; and on
November 21, 2021, the Agency effectuated the planned-personnel action.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ).


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2022004702

When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision (FAD) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In the FAD, the Agency provided that when Complainant received his promotion, there was a
Memorandum of Understanding which informed him that the promotion was temporary, not to
exceed July 22, 2022; and could be terminated earlier if his performance was unsatisfactory.
Regarding his termination, management explained that the decision to terminate was based
solely on Complainant's inadequate performance, his failure to timely meet deadlines on a large
project, his failure to provide status reports on the project when requested in October 2021, as
well as his failure to show up to a September 2, 2021, meeting. The Agency also provided that
management denied ever being informed that Complainant had been diagnosed with mental
illnesses which were impacting his performance. Similarly, management denied being informed
that Complainant was affected professionally, or being informed that Complainant was having
emotional problems, mental health issues, or that he was experiencing anxiety or depression.
The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Upon careful review of the record, we find that the Agency’s final decision accurately recounted
the relevant facts. The final decision also correctly identified the legal standard for Complainant
to prove that he was subjected to disability discrimination. Concerning his allegations of
disparate treatment discrimination, he must satisfy the three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned
by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Based on
our review of the appeal, we find that the Agency, in its decision, considered all of the
circumstances and found that there was no discriminatory intent regarding Complainant’s
treatment. The record does not show that Complainant was subjected to harassment or
discrimination, nor is there additional evidence on appeal which would support such a
contention.

Based on a thorough review of the record, we find that FAD correctly determined that the
preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Complainant was discriminated against by
the Agency as alleged. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.
                                                  3                                 2022004702

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                4                                     2022004702

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 8, 2022
Date
