             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Eura B., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Deb A. Haaland,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of the Interior,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022001635

                                 Hearing No. 570-2021-00761X

                                 Agency No. DOI-OS-20-0403

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s January 4, 2022 final
decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a Supervisory IT Cybersecurity Specialist
within the Agency’s Financial Management Directorate (FMD) in Herndon, Virginia.

On August 27, 2020, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of disability (vertigo) and in reprisal for prior protected
EEO activity.

On November 9, 2020, the Agency accepted the formal complaint for investigation. After the
investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation (ROI)



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022001635

and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ).
Complainant timely requested a hearing.

On September 15, 2021, the AJ issued a Post Conference Order. Therein, the AJ found that the
parties agreed to the following framing of the issues:

       1. Whether the Agency discriminated against Complainant based on her
          disability when it did not grant a reasonable accommodation request on or
          about February 19, 2020.

       2. Whether the Agency discriminated against Complainant based on her EEO
          activity, including subjecting her to reprisal-based harassment, from March
          2019 to February 2021 (as manifested by the numerous events averments to
          the Agency’s EEO Office in the ROI, Tab 3, and in the Complainant’s
          preliminary conference report to the [AJ]).

The AJ also ordered, in pertinent part, that one sentence be redacted from the ROI at 173, an
affidavit from an Agency official, no later than October 15, 2021.

On November 15, 2021, Complainant withdrew her request for a hearing and requested a final
agency decision. The AJ issued an Order of Dismissal and Remand for Final Agency Decision
on November 15, 2021.

On January 4, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision finding no discrimination. Regarding
claim (1), the denial of a reasonable accommodation, the Agency found that it provided
Complainant with her requested accommodation – a full-time telework. Final Agency Decision
(FAD) at 36. Specifically, the Agency set forth, “[s]he requested full-time telework, and the
Agency granted that accommodation. She has not alleged that the Agency has asked her to come
back to the office since she was granted her requested accommodation of full-time telework in
March 2020. While Complainant has disagreed with the Agency’s terminology related to her
requested accommodation, the Agency nonetheless provided her with the requested
accommodation.” Id.

Regarding claim (2), a reprisal-based harassment claim, the Agency found that Complainant
failed to establish that the numerous alleged incidents at issue were motivated by her protected
activity. FAD at 35. The Agency reasoned, “[a]lthough some of the management officials knew
of her previous EEO activity, there is no evidence that the conduct she alleged is related to her
prior EEO activity…The record reveals that multiple employees who did not have a technical
background completed the [Information Systems Security Officer, ISSO duties]. While
Complainant characterizes the reassignment of these tasks as based on her protected EEO
activity, there is no evidence that this is the case. To the contrary, the ISSO tasks seemed to be
assigned to multiple individuals without a technical background. Id.
                                                3                                     2022001635

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant, through her attorney, requests that we
reverse the Agency’s FAD. Complainant’s attorney sets forth that the FAD “relies on
unauthorized confidential settlement disclosures made by a [named Agency official] in his
declaration as a basis for reaching its conclusions – after the [AJ] initially assigned to the case
ordered the Agency to have those portions of the affidavit redacted and the Agency failed to
follow that order. The AJ instructed the Agency to redact the references to confidential
settlement communications found in [a named Agency official’s] affidavit…The Agency did not
follow the AJ’s instructions…” FAD at 1. Based on the foregoing, Complainant’s attorney
asserts that the Agency should be sanctioned for failing to follow the AJ’s Order and for using
what should have been redacted to form a conclusion that is adverse to Complainant.
Complainant’s Brief at 1 n.1.

Regarding claim (1), the denial of a reasonable accommodation, Complainant asserts that she
was granted telework as a “temporary job modification” and not a reasonable accommodation.
Thus, Complainant asserts that she never received notification that her reasonable
accommodation was approved.

Regarding claim (2), a reprisal-based harassment claim, Complainant asserts that the Agency
assigned her ISSO duties based on her prior protected EEO activity in an effort to overload her
with work. Complainant’s Brief at 23. Specifically, Complainant, through her attorney, asserts
that “[m]anagement’s explanation that [she] was best qualified for the ISSO work defies logic, as
she had never performed the tasks previously, nor had they ever provided her with any training
before assigning her duties that required immediate action and no ongoing support.” Id.

In response, the Agency requests that we affirm its final decision. The Agency asserts it did
comply with the AJ’s Order by submitting a redacted ROI on October 15, 2021 and a corrected
supplemental ROI on October 29, 2021. The Agency set forth that “[w]hile the FAD does cite to
and references [a named Agency official’s] affidavit in general, the information…which the AJ
required redaction is never specifically referred to…in the FAD.” Agency’s Brief at 3. The
Agency reiterates its reasoning in the FAD for finding no discrimination for claims (1) and (2).


                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                  4                                     2022001635

As an initial matter, we decline to sanction the Agency regarding the redaction of one sentence
from an affidavit in the ROI. The record reflects that the Agency complied with the AJ’s Order
when it submitted a supplemental ROI on October 15, 2021, and a corrected supplemental ROI
on October 29, 2021. The sentence at issue on page 173 of the ROI was redacted from the
supplemental ROI and the corrected supplemental ROI. Based on the foregoing, we find that the
Agency followed the AJ’s Order.

We acknowledge, however, that the Agency, on appeal, uploaded a prior version of the ROI
which did not redact the sentence at issue. However, we find that this action constitutes harmless
error because we rely on the corrected supplemental ROI (with the proper redaction) in issuing
this decision herein.

Claim (1)-Denial of a Reasonable Accommodation

To establish that she was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: 1)
she is an individual with a disability; 2) she is a qualified individual with a disability; and 3) the
Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on
Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (Enforcement Guidance). “The term ‘qualified’ with
respect to an individual with a disability, means that the individual satisfies the requisite skill,
experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment position such
individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the
essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). An agency is required to make
reasonable accommodation to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified
individual with a disability unless the agency can show that accommodation would cause undue
hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p).

Assuming arguendo that Complainant is a qualified individual with a disability, we concur with
the Agency’s final decision that it provided Complainant with the requested accommodation,
full-time telework. The record contains medical documentation dated February 24, 2020, from a
Family Nurse Practitioner requesting that Complainant be provided with telework with a
suggested duration of six months.2 ROI at 432. In a March 6, 2020, memorandum,
Complainant’s supervisor sets forth that he is granting Complainant’s “temporary job
modification” of full-time work from home effectively immediately through September 7, 2020.
ROI at 428. Complainant, however, has not alleged that the Agency required her to stop
teleworking and return to the office.

Claim (2)-Reprisal-Based Harassment




2
 The record contains prior medical documentation for Complainant dated February 17, 2020.
This documentation requested that Complainant be able to telework until her condition resolved.
The documentation did not set forth a suggested timeframe. ROI at 289.
                                                5                                     2022001635

To establish a claim of harassment a complainant must show that: (1) they belong to a statutorily
protected class; (2) they were subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on
their statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment
and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or
creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for
imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir.
1982). Further, the incidents must have been "sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the
conditions of [complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment." Harris
v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). The harasser's conduct should be evaluated
from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim's circumstances. Enforcement
Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar. 8, 1994).

In the instant matter, Complainant has alleged numerous incidents of harassment. The Agency,
in a detailed decision, set forth that it articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the
alleged incidents at issue and that Complainant failed to establish that the alleged incidents were
based on her prior EEO activity. We concur.

We do not address each alleged incident of harassment herein. However, a significant portion of
Complainant’s claims pertain to her being assigned Information System Security Officer (ISSO)
duties and not receiving an appropriate level of support to complete these duties. The record
contains an affidavit from Complainant’s supervisor during this period. Therein, the supervisor
asserted that he was informed by higher-level Agency officials of a pressing need for someone to
perform the role of ISSO for two applications. ROI at 187. The supervisor stated that after a
discussion among the members of the leadership team it was determined that Complainant was
the most qualified to perform the job. Id. He further stated that he informed Complainant that
the ISSO work took priority over her web content duties. ROI at 187-188.

The record also contains an affidavit from Complainant’s second-level supervisor during the
time period. Therein, he asserted that he supported the leadership team’s decision to assign
ISSO duties to Complainant. ROI at 163. He stated that prior to assigning the ISSO duties,
Complainant was one of the department’s most senior Information Security Specialists with
considerable exposure to the department’s systems. ROI at 164.

While Complainant asserts that she did not have a sufficient technical background to perform
these duties, the record reflects that other personnel who had been assigned ISSO duties also had
not previously performed these duties at the time of their assignment and that they did not have a
technical background. The record contains a declaration under penalty of perjury from an FMD
employee. Therein, he asserted that he was assigned ISSO work as an ancillary duty for a period
of time. ROI at 474. He stated that he did not have a background in IT or cybersecurity and that
performing ISSO duties was completely new to him. 3 ROI at 475.


3
  Another employee, in a declaration under penalty of perjury, asserted that she was also
assigned ISSO work as an ancillary duty. ROI at 465. She requested her supervisor not to assign
                                                 6                                     2022001635


The record also contains a declaration under penalty of perjury from another FMD employee
who had performed ISSO work as an ancillary duty in the past. Therein, she asserted that she
asked not to be assigned ISSO duties because she felt that she did not have the IT expertise
necessary for these responsibilities. ROI at 472.

An Agency official, in a declaration under penalty of perjury, asserted that she previously
received complaints from other ISSOs within FMD regarding their workload and not
understanding the work to be completed. ROI at 463.

Based on the foregoing, we find that the record reflects that there were various ongoing issues
with assigning ISSO duties to FMD personnel. Specifically the record reflects that the FMD
personnel assigned ISSO work lacked, according to some individuals, an appropriate technical
background. In addition, the record also reflects there were issues pertaining to the amount of
the workload regarding ISSO duties, and issues pertaining to job satisfaction regarding the
personnel who were assigned ISSO duties. Thus, we find that Complainant failed to establish,
by a preponderance of evidence, that these duties were assigned to her in reprisal for her prior
protected EEO activity.

Regarding the level of support Complainant received in performing ISSO duties, the record
contains an affidavit from an IT Cybersecurity Specialist within a different management chain.
Therein, he asserted that he was directed to let the assigned ISSOs perform their duties and that if
specific actions were needed requiring his involvement, he would be called upon. ROI at 245.

Regarding the removal of Complainant’s supervisory duties around February 5, 2021,
Complainant’s supervisor asserted that Complainant complained to him that she did not have the
“bandwidth” to perform her supervisory duties in addition to her other duties, which included
performing ISSO duties for two systems and web content manager duties. ROI at 458. In
addition, Complainant’s supervisor stated that Complainant, at the time, supervised two
employees, both of whom planned to retire on March 31, 2021, and that Agency policy requires
that a supervisor have at least four employees to justify supervisory status. Thus, Complainant’s
supervisor asserted that she was not compliant with the supervisory requirements. Id.

Upon review of the record, we concur with the Agency’s detailed final decision that
Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged incidents
comprising her harassment claim, including those specifically not referenced herein, were based
on her prior protected EEO activity.

Finally, we note that in the instant matter, Complainant withdrew her request for a hearing before
an EEOC AJ.


her these duties because she did not have the IT security expertise. ROI at 465-466. She further
stated that she was told that there was no money for a full-time ISSO, so FMD was having FMD
employees take on these duties in addition to their other assignments. ROI at 465.
                                               7                                    2022001635

As a result of Complainant’s decision to withdraw her hearing request, we do not have the
benefit of an AJ’s credibility determinations or an AJ overseeing the further development of the
record through a hearing. Complainant bears the burden to prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that she was subjected to harassment based on her protected classes, we find that she
has not met that burden.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination or unlawful
retaliation was established as alleged.




                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                8                                     2022001635

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  9                                     2022001635

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                          Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 17, 2023
Date
