              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Rolf K., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                   Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                               (Customs and Border Protection),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021004358

                                  Hearing No. 471201900093X

                                 Agency No. HSCBP019692018

                                           DECISION

Complainant appealed to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC” or
“Commission”), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403, from a June 30, 2021 Final Agency Decision
(“FAD”) concerning an equal employment opportunity (“EEO”) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (“Title VII”), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (“Rehabilitation
Act”), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by the Agency as
a Border Protection Agent, GS-1896-12, Detroit Sector, at the Agency’s Detroit Sector
Headquarters, in Detroit, Michigan.

On August 28, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination, including
harassment/a hostile work environment, on the bases of race (Black/African-American), color
(dark complexion), and reprisal (protected EEO activity) when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2021004358

    1. From June 2017 through June 2018, a Supervisory Border Patrol Agent launched
       an “off the books” investigation of Complainant whereby supervisory and non-
       supervisory employees questioned Complainant about his children; surveilled his
       home and family; used Agency databases to investigate his finances and criminal
       background; requested his location after work hours; monitored his work email
       and personal social media use, generated reports about his personal life; disclosed
       information to employees regarding the investigation; and asked him “who is
       going to kick your door in today,”

    2. On April 11, 2018, Complainant learned he was not selected for the position of
       Border Patrol Agent (Operational Mobility Announcement), GS-1896- 05/12, at
       the Sandusky Bay Station, Detroit Sector, in Port Clinton, Ohio advertised under
       Job Opportunity Announcement (“JOA”) No. USBP-OM-10058024-CS.

    3. On May 24, 2018, Complainant was notified that he was not selected for the
       position of Border Patrol Agent (Operational Mobility Announcement), GS-1896-
       05/12, at the Sandusky Bay Station, Detroit Sector, in Port Clinton, Ohio,
       advertised under JOA No. USBP-OM-10202002-JRB, although he was actually
       selected for the position.

    4. In June or July 2018, Complainant overheard a Supervisory Agent comment, “It’s
       a shame [Complainant] called EEO because now we have to investigate it,”
       referring to Complainant’s EEO complaint.

Prior to investigating Complainant’s complaint, the Agency dismissed an additional nonselection
claim for untimely EEO contact. 2 At the conclusion of its investigation of the accepted claims,
the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation (“ROI”) and notice
of his right to request a FAD or a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (“AJ”).
Complainant requested a hearing and the parties engaged in discovery. Complainant
subsequently withdrew his hearing request and asked for a FAD instead. The AJ remanded the
matter to the Agency, which issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The evidence developed through the EEO investigation and discovery reveals that in July 2016,
Complainant was detailed to the Agency’s Sandusky Bay Station in Port Clinton, Ohio from his
permanent duty station in Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan. Complainant relocated his family to Ohio,
believing that Management would find him a permanent position at Sandusky Bay Station.
However, in October 2016, the detail ended. Complainant’s supervisor at Sault Ste. Marie
Station, a Special Operations Supervisor (also referenced as an Executive Officer), GS-1896-13,
granted him a transfer to the Agency’s Detroit Sector Headquarters, in Detroit, Michigan.




2
  (September 21, 2017, JOA No. MHCBPROB-1910426-CS), for untimely EEO contact
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §1614.107(a)(2).
                                               3                                    2021004358

There, Complainant was assigned to Pre-Employment Activities (Recruiting) and later detailed
to the Detroit Sector Border Intelligence Center (“BIC”). Meanwhile, Complainant applied to
positions at Sandusky Bay Station.

In or around June 2017, Supervisor transferred to Detroit Sector BIC. Soon afterward, a meeting
was held with Supervisor, management officials and some of Complainant’s colleagues.
Complainant did not attend the meeting, but afterward, he noticed a marked change in the other
employees’ attitudes toward him. According to Complainant, some managers and agents stopped
speaking to him, while others “made crude comments relating to [his] family.” Complainant
began to notice when agents called and asked where he was, and when, during conversations
(“interviews”), agents asked him personal questions about his family and finances. Considering
the events collectively, Complainant concluded that he was being subjected to an “off the books”
investigation.

Complainant alleges that the “off the books” investigation continued until June 2018 when he
initiated the instant complaint. Among other things, Supervisor allegedly directed employees at
the Detroit Sector BIC to monitor Complainant’s emails and social media accounts and access
his financial records and various law enforcement records. Complainant further alleges that
agents involved in the investigation verbally informed him that they were surveilling his home
and family. Complainant is not aware of the outcome of the investigation but confirms that it did
not result in any official action by the Agency.

In September 2017, Complainant learned that he was not selected after interviewing for a
position at Sandusky Bay Station. 3 On or around October 26, 2017, Complainant responded to
the job announcement for the position referenced in Claim 2. On January 19, 2018, the Human
Resources Management Office (“HRM”) notified Complainant that he was deemed eligible and
that his application was referred for consideration. On or about April 11, 2018, HRM informed
Complainant that he was not selected. He cites these incidents as evidence that Management was
deliberately preventing him from working at his desired location of Sandusky Bay Station in
order to harass him and get him to resign.

On or about May 1, 2018, Complainant responded to the job announcement for the position
referenced in Claim 3. He was deemed qualified, but, once again, he was not selected.
Complainant recounts that he spoke to a Division Chief, GS-1896-14, Detroit Sector
Headquarters (Complainant’s fifth level supervisor) when he learned of his nonselection. The
Division Chief informed Complainant privately that he “made some calls and pulled some
strings” and secured the position at Sandusky Bay Station for Complainant. Complainant
responded, “it would have been nice to hear that a week ago because I already filed an EEO
complaint.” He then asked Division Chief, “what about the investigation?” Complainant recounts
that the Division Chief acted as though he was unaware of Complainant’s EEO complaint,
claimed that there was no investigation, then swore and walked away.


3
  Complainant submitted his resignation in October 2017 withdrew it and continued to seek a
transfer to Sandusky Bay Station.
                                                 4                                     2021004358


In or around August 2018, Management became aware of Complainant’s allegation that
Supervisor initiated an unauthorized investigation and notified the Agency’s Office of
Professional Responsibility (“OPR”). OPR opened an internal investigation of Supervisor for
“major/criminal misconduct” (OPR Case No. 201810099), which addressed Complainant’s
allegations in Claim 4.

In September 2018, Complainant was assigned to the position referenced in Claim 3 and he
transferred to Sandusky Bay Station, Detroit Sector, in Port Clinton, OH. Complainant clarifies:
“[t]o say that I was selected for this position is a mischaracterization of what happened. I was
assigned to this position at Sandusky Bay Station only after I filled [out] an informal EEO
complaint.” Emphasis original. Division Chief maintains that he facilitated Complainant’s
transfer on June 1, 2018, before Complainant’s initial EEO contact.

On October 30, 2018, OPR issued a Bluebook Report, which the Agency provided for the record.
The Report summarized interviews of Complainant, Supervisor, two agents who Complainant
alleged told him of their surveillance activities, the management official who was allegedly
reading his emails and researching his financial information, and others in the Detroit Sector
Intelligence Unit allegedly involved or aware of the investigation (a total of 9 interviews). The
witnesses all denied Complainant’s allegations and the report concluded that Complainant’s
allegations were “unfounded.”

Complainant acknowledges that he was never formally notified of the investigation and that he
lacks evidence to support that it occurred. However, Complainant provided the EEO Investigator
and the AJ with lists documents that could prove he was subject to an “off the books”
investigation and a list of 15 individuals who were allegedly aware of or participated in the
investigation. Complainant asserts that travel vouchers from January 1, 2017 through August 1,
2018, along with field intelligence reports, requests for information and one-pagers, in relation to
him and his activities all exist. He identifies other types of documents, such as federal court
records, and disciplinary records for supervisors, and EEO investigative records for his
colleagues’ complaints, but does not state how they would establish that the “off the books”
investigation occurred. Complainant states that there is a report called an Administrator’s Audit
Report that will establish that Management was monitoring his emails.

The FAD concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. Complainant filed the instant appeal, explaining that the record was
not sufficiently developed to allow for a decision and requesting that the Commission order the
Agency to conduct a supplemental investigation.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a).
                                                5                                    2021004358

See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, (“EEO
MD-110”) at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Dissatisfaction with EEO Investigation

The regulation under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires the Agency to create an impartial and
appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised by the written
complaint. An “appropriate factual record” is “one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw
conclusions as to whether discrimination occurred.” § 1614.108(b). However, the complainant,
upon receipt of the ROI, is provided an opportunity to cure defects in the record by either
notifying the agency (in writing) of any perceived deficiencies in the investigation or requesting
a hearing before an AJ. See EEO MD-110, at Ch. 6, § XI and Ch. 7, § I.

Complainant expressed that he was not satisfied with the ROI, 4 so he properly requested a
hearing to further develop the record. Complainant, then assisted by legal counsel, and the
Agency participated in discovery. We note that in a May 23, 2020, response partially granting
Complainant’s Motion to Compel, the AJ explained to Complainant that documents outside the
Agency’s possession, such as court filings and text records from What’s App, fall outside the
scope of discovery. Significantly, the AJ determined that “Audit Logs for January 1, 2017-
August 1, 2018 regarding any investigation regarding Complainant” were not in the Agency’s
possession, and therefore outside the scope of discovery. We adopt the AJ’s determination.

On appeal, Complainant contends that neither the EEO Investigator nor the AJ will consider the
“elephant in the room,” namely, the list of documents he provided for the ROI. However, this is
simply not true. The EEO Investigator interviewed nearly all of Complainant’s requested
witnesses and obtained some of the requested documents. A June 2019 email exchange reveals
that the EEO Investigator was responsive when Complainant asked that all of the documents on
the list be included. Specifically, the EEO Investigator asked Complainant to clarify whether he
was asking to supplement the record and, if so, to let her know the specific information he
intended these requested documents provide. It appears Complainant did not respond, even after
the EEO Investigator provided an additional opportunity prior to filing the ROI. Likewise, the AJ
addressed Complainant’s requests, and the additional requests he submitted during the discovery
period.




4
  We emphasize that an EEO Investigator is not necessarily obligated to pursue all of a
complainant’s suggestions regarding how the investigation is conducted. See Sid E. v. Dep’t of
Transportation, EEOC Appeal No. 2019002597 (Sept. 22, 2020).
                                                 6                                     2021004358

Complainant also argues that the AJ’s decision that the Agency did not possess documents
pertaining to the “off the books” investigation was based on a “demonstrably false statement” by
the Agency’s attorney. However, Complainant does not provide any evidence, other than his
own bald statements, to “demonstrate” or even call into question whether the signed, sworn
statement by the Agency’s attorney was “false.” To the extent Complainant believes the witness
testimony in both the EEO and OPR investigations, denying that the “off the books” is also false,
he waived his opportunity to cross examine witnesses when he withdrew his hearing request. For
purposes of this decision, which cannot provide credibility findings, we have determined the
record is adequately developed. Complainant’s request for a supplemental investigation is
DENIED.

Procedural Dismissal

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §1614.107(a)(2) states, in relevant part, that an agency shall dismiss
a complaint or a portion of a complaint that fails to comply with the applicable time limits
contained in §1614.105, unless the Agency extends the time limits in accordance with
§1614.604(c). Pursuant to §1614.105(a)(1), an aggrieved person must initiate contact with an
EEOC Counselor within 45 days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the
case of a personnel action, within 45 days of the effective date of the action. Complainant
became aware of his nonselection, which is a personnel action, on September 21, 2017.
However, Complainant did not initiate contact with an EEO Counselor until June 4, 2018, which
is beyond the 45-day limitation period. Complainant has not offered adequate justification to
waive the time limit in this case.

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment based on indirect evidence is examined under the three-part
analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For
Complainant to prevail, he or she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The
burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep’t. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the Agency
has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St.
Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination.
                                                7                                    2021004358

U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v.
Dep’t. of Transp., EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep’t. of Health
and Human Serv., EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep’t. of the
Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

The record reveals that the positions referenced in Claims 2 and 3 were both advertised on USA
Jobs as Operational Mobility Announcements, with multiple locations for permanent
reassignment. All Border Patrol Agents in the Bargaining Unit, within the same occupational
series as the announced position, were eligible to apply. In accordance with the Agency’s policy,
set forth in its Operational Mobility Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”), selections were
not based on interviews or scoring applications. Rather, half of the selections were based on
seniority only, and half were selected by a selecting official.

For Claim 2, the recommending official, a Patrol Agent in Charge, GS-1896-14, at Sandusky
Bay Station, Detroit Sector, testified that there were 150 to 200 applicants. He reviewed their
resumes and made recommendations based on specific skill sets needed at the station, such as
Spanish language fluency and case work experience. Complainant was not recommended for the
position, as other candidates had more of the qualifications sought by the recommending official.
The selecting official, Deputy Chief Patrol Agent, GS-1896-15, was the Acting Chief at the time
of selections. He based his selection on seniority and chose the applicants set forth by the
recommending official. The ROI contains supporting evidence, and the explanation is consistent
with the Operational Mobility MOU. Complainant has not provided any evidence, aside from
bald assertions, that the Agency’s proffered reason was pretext for discrimination or reprisal.

For Claim 3, Complainant does not dispute that he was placed in the referenced position at
Management’s discretion, which is consistent with the Operational Mobility MOU. Complainant
asserts “[i]f I wasn’t qualified and [Management] hadn’t discriminated against me or retaliated
for my prior EEO activity, then I doubt they would have selected me.” Regardless, Complainant
cannot establish disparate treatment because he has not shown that he was subjected to an
adverse employment action.

Harassment/Hostile Work Environment

To prove his harassment claim, Complainant must establish that he was subjected to conduct that
was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s position would
have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct
was taken because of his membership in a protected class, or as reprisal for engaging in protected
EEO activity. Only if Complainant establishes both hostility and motive, will the question of
Agency liability present itself. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982);
Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Employer Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors,
EEOC Notice 915.002 (Jun. 18, 1999).
                                               8                                    2021004358

The Agency’s actions pertaining to Claims 2 and 3 will not be considered in analyzing
Complainant’s harassment allegation because, for reasons previously discussed, Complainant has
not established discriminatory or retaliatory motivation.

As for Claims 1 and 4, Complainant’s only evidence that the events occurred as alleged are his
own bald statements. See Kabir v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120080058
(Mar. 31, 2010) (a complainant’s belief, no matter how sincere, is insufficient to establish that
the agency's proffered explanation is a pretext for unlawful discrimination). Complainant has not
demonstrated that further development of the record would yield such evidence. As Complainant
withdrew his hearing request, we do not have the benefit of an AJ’s credibility determinations.
See citing Lore v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113283 (Sept. 13, 2013)
(Complainant failed to establish that witnesses made false statements where he withdrew his
request for a hearing and credibility determinations were unable to be made). In other words,
Complainant did not meet his burden of proof because he did not offer additional evidence to
support his assertions. Granville W. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No.
2022003647 (Nov. 7, 2022).

                                        CONCLUSION

Having thoroughly reviewed the record and the Parties’ contentions on appeal, including those
not specifically addressed herein, Complainant has not established discrimination as alleged.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                  9                                   2021004358

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 10                                     2021004358

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                          Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 5, 2023
Date
