              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Anette B, 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                     Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                            Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                             (Citizenship and Immigration Services),
                                             Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022000867

                       Hearing No. 480-2021-00434X; 480-2021-00435X

                                Agency No. HS-CIS-23437-2015


                                           DECISION

On December 3, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 3, 2021, final order concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final order.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a CIS Assistant (OA),
GS-1802-07, at the Agency’s Los Angeles Asylum Office in Anaheim, California. Report of
Investigation (ROI 1), dated December 30, 2015, at 92. Complainant was born in Vietnam and is
of Chinese ancestry. Supplemental ROI (SROI), dated May 10, 2018, at 43.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                       2022000867

On March 11, 2015, the Agency posted a vacancy for the position of Immigration Analyst, CIS-
1333791-ASY (position 1). ROI 1 at 73-9. On September 8, 2015, the Agency posted a second
vacancy announcement for the position of Immigration Analyst, CIS-1495193-ASY (position 2).
SROI at 140. The Agency posted a vacancy announcement for Immigration Analyst, CIS-186901-
ZLA (position 3). Complainant applied for all three positions. ROI 1 at 127 and SROI at 46.

There were two interviewing officials for position 1. One of those officials was a recommending
official (Recommending Official 1). The other interviewing official was Complainant’s third-line
supervisor at the time, the Deputy Director. She was the selecting official (Selecting Official) for
the position. ROI 1 at 228. Four applicants were selected for position1: Selectee 1 (Hispanic);
Selectee 2 (Caucasian); Selectee 3 (Caucasian); and Selectee 4 (Asian). SROI at 55. Complainant
was not interviewed for position 1.

According to Selecting Official, consistent with office practice, only applicants with a rating of
“Achieved Excellence” were considered. ROI 1 at 228. Prior to her application for the position,
Complainant was rated “Exceeds Expectations,” which was below “Achieved Excellence.” ROI
1 at 316-18. Selecting Official stated that because Complainant did not receive the top rating of
“Achieved Excellence” for the prior fiscal year (FY 2014), she was not interviewed for position 1.
ROI 1 at 228. Selectee 1 (Asian)

There were two interviewing officials for position 2. One of those officials was a second
recommending official, the Acting Supervisory Chief of Staff (Recommending Official 2). SROI
at 50. The other interviewing official was the Selecting Official. SROI at 73. The Los Angeles
Asylum Office did not use ranking or scoring to assess applicants. Complainant was interviewed
for the position. SROI at 63.

Instead, when applicants reached the interview phase of the selection process, the factors that
inform whether the applicant would be recommended for selection and selected were the
candidate’s interview performance and the strength of the applicant’s references. SROI at 64.

Recommending Official 2 did not recommend Complainant to Selecting Official because
Complainant’s interview responses “were quite brief and lacked detail.” According to
Recommending Official 2, Complainant provided fewer specifics in comparison to the selectee
and others who were interviewed and did not expound upon her work or how she had demonstrated
the attributes discussed. SROI at 64.

According to Recommending Official 2, the other applicant for the position “provided detailed
responses to the questions in the interview and had excellent references.” SROI at 65. That
applicant (Selectee 5 (Hispanic) was selected for position 2. SROI at 63 and 67.

There were also two interviewing officials for position 3 (Recommending Officials 3 and 4). ROI
2 at 109. Selecting Official was the selecting official for position 3. 2nd Report of Investigation
(ROI 2), dated November 8, 2017, at 122. Complainant was interviewed for this position. ROI 2
at 79.
                                               3                                       2022000867

Recommending Officials 3 and 4 did not recommend that Complainant be selected for position 3.
ROI 2 at 91. Recommending Official 3 did not recommend Complainant for selection because
Complainant’s “interview went poorly.” ROI 2 at 110-11. According to Recommending Official
3, Complainant’s “responses were not completely responsive to the questions at times. Her
examples were weak and broad and general, instead of specific and concrete. They did not
demonstrate a high level of skill in the areas questioned. She also was not articulate in her
responses. Her answers did not demonstrate the qualities we were looking for.” ROI 2 at 111.

Three other applicants were interviewed for position 3. According to Recommending Official 3,
those applicants had much more successful interviews than Complainant. ROI 2 at 111-12. All
three of those applicants, Selectee 6 (Vietnamese/Asian), Selectee 7, (Hispanic), and Selectee 8
(race unknown) were selected for position 3. ROI 2 at 80. Selectee 9, Caucasian applicant, was
hired as a non-competitive applicant and, as such, was not selected from the vacancy
announcement for position 3. ROI 2 at 321.

After being informed of her non-selection, Complainant approached Recommending Official 3
and asked why she was not selected. According to Recommending Official 3, she told
Complainant that she was not recommended for selection because her “interview was not the
strongest and people interviewed better than her. Recommending Official 3 told Complainant that
her responses were not elaborate or provided a lot of examples.” ROI 2 at 93.

Recommending Official 1 first became aware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity in mid-2017,
when she was asked to gather documents responsive to an EEO investigator’s inquiries. ROI 2 at
104. Recommending Officials 2, 3, and 4 were unaware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity at
the time they interviewed her for positions 2 and 3. SROI at 60 and ROI 2 at 89. Selecting Official
learned of Complainant’s prior EEO activity in March 2015, when she was notified that
Complainant was pursuing mediation for an EEO complaint. ROI 1 at 235.

Six months later, on August 2, 2017, Complainant again applied for the position of Immigration
Analyst, and she was selected. SROI at 56 and 81.

At Complainant’s work location, it was customary to have colleagues assist when a CIS Assistant
was not available. ROI 1 at 159 and 200. There were 17 CIS Assistants, including Complainant,
working at the Los Angeles Asylum Office in 2017. SROI at 281. If just one of the seventeen
CIS Assistants called out sick, approximately 8 hours of coverage had to be performed. Spread
out equally over 15 CIS assistants, each CIS Assistant provided approximately 32 minutes of
coverage for just one CIS Assistant absence. This 32-minute estimate excludes the need for any
additional coverages such as coverage for a second or third CIS Assistant calling out sick, coverage
for the lunch breaks of CIS Assistants, coverage for CIS Assistants who arrive late or leave early,
etc. Of the 17 CIS Assistants at Complainant’s work location, six (35 percent of the total) were
Asian. The next largest group were Caucasian, which also had six persons. SROI at 281.
                                              4                                       2022000867

Of the 12 Immigration Analysts, the position to which Complainant was previously not selected,
three were Asian (or 25% of the total). The next largest group was Caucasian, which also had
three persons. SROI at 281-83.

Complainant asserted that between 2011 and 2017, her supervisors engaged in unwelcome
conduct. These were eight different supervisors of different sexes and races, five of who were
Complainant’s first-line supervisors. For example, according to Complainant, on August 29, 2014
she had no problem working on her assignments but she needed reasonable time to complete her
tasks instead of covering other coworkers’ assignments and losing her work hours to work on her
own assignments. Complainant asserted that she explained this to her then supervisor; however
the supervisor did not listen to Complainant and insisted that she needed more training, even after
the supervisor had observed Complainant’s work performance and felt that Complainant was doing
good work.

Complainant stated that on January 22, 2015, she was intimidated by being brought into a private
meeting with two of her supervisors. According to Complainant, they proceeded to belittle her by
falsely accusing her of having an attitude problem and a time management problem. Complainant
asserted that she was not aware of any other coworkers who were treated in that manner. ROI 1
at 137.

Complainant initiated EEO contact on March 4, 2015, and March 30, 2017. On May 8, 2015, and
May 26, 2017, Complainant filed two separate EEO complaints (with subsequent amendments on
September 16, 2015, and November 20, 2015) alleging that the Agency discriminated against her
and subjected her to a hostile work environment on the bases of race (Chinese) and reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

EEOC No. 480-2021-0043X, formerly 480-2016-00473X (Agency Case No. HS-CIS-23437-2015
[First Case]), whether Complainant was subject to discrimination based on her race (Chinese) and
reprisal when the following alleged incidents occurred:

   1. From September 26, 2013, through January 23, 2015, Complainant was subjected to
      harassment amounting to a hostile work environment. Some events that were provided as
      examples to support this claim include when management: had Complainant cover co-
      worker's assignments and still expected Complainant to complete assignments on deadline;
      moved up Complainant's deadlines with little notice; told Complainant that she needed
      more training and needed to log her work daily when Complainant tried to discuss her
      workload; gave Complainant a mid­cycle review where it was referenced that she did not
      complete her assignments on time; falsely accused Complainant of talking on her phone
      and texting while at work; gave Complainant a "B" rating on her fiscal year·2014
      Performance Plan and Appraisal; and accused Complainant of having time management
      issues and an attitude.
                                              5                                     2022000867

   2. On July 27, 2015, Complainant learned that she was not selected for the position of
      Immigration Analyst (Asylum) at the Los Angeles Asylum Office, advertised under
      vacancy announcement CIS-1333791-ASY.

EEOC No. 480-2021-00435X, formerly 480-2018-00139X (Agency No. HS-CIS-01442-2017
[Second Case]), whether Complainant was subject to discrimination on the bases of race (Chinese)
and reprisal (prior EEO activity) when:

   1. On February 16, 2017, she learned that she was not selected for the Immigration Analyst
      position at the Los Angeles Asylum Office advertised under vacancy announcement CIS-
      186190 1-ZLA.

   2. On or about January 4, 2016, Complainant learned that she was not selected for the position
      of Immigration Analyst (asylum), GS-0901-07/09, vacancy announcement CIS-1333791-
      ASY.

The Agency conducted investigations into the two complaints. At the conclusion of the
investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and
notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.

Both complaints were consolidated. The parties participated in discovery. The two complaints
were dismissed without prejudice. The Agency was ordered to conduct a supplemental
investigation due to Complainant’s February 16, 2016, request to amend her first case. The
supplemental investigation was conducted, and the Agency submitted the Supplemental Report of
Investigation (SROI). The complaints were reopened at Complainant’s request. On July 1, 2021,
the agency filed a Motion for Decision Without a Hearing (Agency’s motion). On July 15, 2021,
Complainant filed a response in opposition (Complainant’s opposition). The Agency filed a reply.

After a review of the submissions and the evidence in the case file, the AJ assigned to the case
observed that the record had been adequately developed for summary disposition. The AJ
determined that a decision without a hearing was appropriate pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §1614.109(g).
The AJ issued a decision without a hearing in favor of the Agency on September 30, 2021.

According to the AJ, the Agency's motion and reply properly addressed the issues, and established
that there were no genuine issues regarding any material facts. The AJ stated that the record was
devoid of evidence demonstrating that similarly situated employees outside of Complainant’s
protected classes were treated more favorably and/or that the Agency’s articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for the alleged discrimination were unworthy of credence. The AJ
stated that the evidence also did not establish a genuine issue of material fact that the alleged
harassment occurred due to Complainant’s race or EEO activity.
                                               6                                        2022000867

For the hostile work environment claim in the First Case, the AJ stated that the parties agreed that
the following issues were discrete and untimely events that were considered solely for a totality of
the circumstances analysis of a hostile work environment: management gave Complainant a mid-
cycle review where it was referenced that she did not complete her assignments on time; falsely
accused Complainant of talking on her phone and texting while at work; and gave Complainant a
"B" rating on her fiscal year 2014 Performance Plan and Appraisal.
The AJ observed that the parties did not dispute that Complainant was born in Vietnam and is of
Chinese ancestry. According to the AJ, while they may dispute the causal connection between
Complainant’s protected activity and her alleged reprisal claim, the parties also did not dispute
that Complainant engaged in protected activity. Therefore, the AJ asserted, she is protected against
disparate treatment and harassment based on race and in reprisal for prior EEO activity.

However, the AJ found that Complainant and the record did not support a prima facie reprisal
claim as to her three non-selection claims. According to the AJ, Complainant was not selected for
the Immigration Analyst (Asylum position) on or about July 27, 2015 because all applicants,
irrespective of protected bases or prior EEO activity, who did not receive an “Achieved
Excellence” rating in their latest performance evaluation did not advance to an interview.

As to Complainant’s non-selections on January 4, 2016 and February 16, 2017, the AJ found that
the temporal scope between the non-selections’ date and Complainant’s March 5, 2015 EEO
contact was too attenuated to establish a causal connection between the protected activity and the
adverse employment action of non-selection. The AJ also noted that the record did not include
evidence establishing a genuine issue of material fact that Selecting Official was aware of the prior
EEO activity during the January 4, 2016 non-selection. According to the AJ, the same was true
for the lack of EEO activity notice of recommending officials when they did not include
Complainant in their recommendations for selection related to the February 16, 2017 non-selection
claim. Without prior notice, asserted the AJ, there was no causal nexus between the protected
activity and the adverse employment actions of non-selection, barring a prima facie reprisal claim.

The AJ found that the record also did not support a prima facie disparate treatment race-based
claim as to the non-selections. Again, observed the AJ, for the July 27, 2015, non-selection,
Complainant did not advance in the selection process because she and all applicants who did not
receive an Achieved Excellence performance rating were eliminated. The AJ stated that whether
said performance ratings were impacted by alleged discrimination did not change information
available to selecting officials at the time of their consideration of applicants. According to the
AJ, the recommending officials’ decision based on incorrect or performance ratings that were
based on alleged discrimination not then known to recommending officials would be insufficient
to establish discrimination.
                                               7                                        2022000867

The AJ observed that rather than presenting a genuine issue of material fact that the Agency’s
actions were based on Complainant’s race, or that the Agency’s legitimate business reasons for
only selecting candidates with an Achieved Excellence performance rating were unworthy of
credence or a pretext for discrimination, the record supports the Agency’s efforts to carry out its
personnel decisions and exercise managerial discretion in applicant considerations irrespective of
protected bases.

According to the AJ, similarly exercising its hiring discretion in the remaining two non-selections,
the Agency determined that all applicants would be heavily evaluated per their interview responses
and recommendations. The AJ determined that the record did not evince a genuine issue of
material fact that Complainant’s consideration was different, demonstrating an absence of
similarly situated applicants of other races being treated more favorably or that that the Agency’s
articulated hiring criteria were unworthy of credence or a pretext for discrimination, barring a
genuine issue of material facts in support of a prima facie disparate treatment claim.

As to Complainant’s hostile work environment claim, the AJ stated that the Agency’s motion and
reply compellingly demonstrated that Complainant’s hostile work environment claim was
untimely, warranting summary judgment. According to the AJ, even if the hostile work
environment claim were timely, however, the alleged incidents of harassment did not present
severe forms of harassment. Yet, asserted the AJ, for purposes of summary judgment alone,
despite their gaps in time and variance in alleged harassers, the various incidents of harassment
were deemed sufficiently pervasive to support a hostile work environment claim. Barring a prima
facie hostile work claim, however, stated the AJ, was the absence of a genuine issue of material
fact that the alleged harassment was motivated by race and/or Complainant’s prior EEO activity.
Instead, observed the AJ, as meticulously outlined in the Agency’s motion and reply, the alleged
harassment presented day to day incidents of workplace unpleasantries and disputes between
employees and supervisors that involved either Complainant’s work assignments or her
performance ratings. Yet, the record was devoid of evidence supporting a genuine issue of material
fact supporting a race and/or reprisal related intent. The AJ noted that as outlined in Complainant’s
response to summary judgment, the circumstances in this case were clearly unpleasant to
Complainant. Even so, the AJ found that employment discrimination laws enforced by the
Commission are not to be used as a "general civility code.” However, asserted the AJ,
objectionable to a Complainant, conduct that amounts to “petty slights and trivial annoyances” or
that otherwise are part of the everyday inconvenience of the workplace are not enough to establish
a hostile work environment. According to the AJ, the alleged discrimination involves routine
managerial supervision, personality conflicts and general workplace disputes and tribulations
instead of harassment that was so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of Complainant’s
workplace. The AJ found that Complainant and the record did not demonstrate genuine issues of
material fact that the harassment was anything other than unpleasant work-related policies,
assignments and performance evaluations unrelated to Complainant’s race and/or EEO activity.
                                                 8                                        2022000867

The AJ held that the record contained insufficient evidence to establish a genuine issue of material
fact as to the ultimate question of discriminatory intent. Thus, the evidence did not present a
genuine issue of material fact in support of a prima facie case of race based disparate treatment,
reprisal, or hostile work environment.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. This appeal followed.

                                   CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

In her appeal brief, among other things, Complainant contests the AJ decision, reiterating her
allegations. Through counsel, Complainant argues that she established a prima facie case of
discrimination for her three non-selections. According to Complainant, only one selectee was
Asian for position 1; and only one of the selectees was Asian for position 3. Complainant asserts
that for position 2, not only was the selectee not Asian, she was also not as qualified for the position
as Complainant. Complainant argues that Selectee 5 was a federal contractor at the time of her
application, and did not meet the time-in-grade requirements.

Complainant also argues that she established a prima facie case of hostile work environment
discrimination. According to Complainant, the Agency's contention that she had not demonstrated
that she was subjected to a hostile work environment because she could not show that the conduct
rose to the level of being severe or pervasive fails. Regarding Complainant’s allegations that her
supervisors would repeatedly have her cover coworker's assignments and still expected her to
complete assignments on deadline, Complainant argues that the Agency incorrectly "averages" the
amount of time that Complainant spent on other coworker's assignments by creating an average
based upon the entire time she was employed with the Agency.

Complainant alleges that the Agency falsely stated that she spent an average of minutes covering
coworkers' assignments when in reality, between September 1, 2014, and May 7, 2015,
Complainant spent a total of 47.25 hours on 16 separate occasions, which equates to, on average,
2.95 hours spent per occasion covering another coworker's assignment.

Complainant also asserts that between March 22, 2012, and January 8, 2016, she provided a total
of 370.5 hours of coverage over approximately 132 occasions, which equates to, on average, 2.81
hours spent per occasion covering other coworker's assignments.

According to Complainant, this amount of time is significant considering that a General Schedule
employee for the Agency is expected to work 8 hours per day, especially given that she was
subjected to this for over 3 years with the Agency. Complainant states that she was required to
spend over 2.5 hours on average on over 100 occasions to cover for her coworkers, while still
being expected to complete her own assignments in a timely fashion. Therefore, Complainant
argues, she has demonstrated that the conduct was objectively severe and pervasive.
                                                9                                       2022000867

Complainant states that she established a prima facie case of retaliation, asserting that the Agency's
contention that it was not aware of her prior EEO activity with regard to the non-selections fails.
According to Complainant, Selecting Official was aware of her prior EEO activity, as she was
aware of the informal EEO complaints and formal EEO complaints in both cases. Therefore,
Complainant states, the Agency's contention that they were unaware of her prior EEO activity
fails.

Complainant argues that the Agency’s explanations for her non-selections were pretextual,
asserting that the Agency's contention that she was not qualified because she had a rating lower
than "5" on her Fiscal Year 2014 performance appraisal fails. According to Complainant, she was
qualified for the vacancy announcement for position 1 because she possessed almost two years of
experience for the duties set forth in the vacancy announcement description. She states that one is
considered qualified for a position if they possess the experience necessary to carry out the
essential functions of the position.

According to Complainant, the non-selection for position 1 (and the two other non-selections) was
in reprisal, including for her refusal to sign her 2014 performance appraisal, and for her filing an
EEO complaint in March 2015. The non-selection for position 1 occurred in July 2015. Citing to
ROI 1 at 103-04, Complainant asserts that her 2014 Fiscal Year appraisal was issued on October
30, 2014, by a rating official who only supervised Complainant for a period of 2 weeks.
Complainant states that she refused to sign the performance appraisal because she disagreed with
the rating official’s assessment of her performance. Complainant requests that the Commission
overturn the AJ’s decision and the Agency’s final order.

In response, among other things, the Agency expresses agreement with the AJ’s determination that
a hearing was unwarranted. The Agency also asserts that Complainant failed to contest the
Agency’s material facts, and was unable to offer evidence to support her claims of discrimination,
retaliation, or harassment.

According to the Agency, Complainant did not challenge a single one of the material facts relevant
to the non-selection for the CIS-1333791-ASY position. The Agency argues that while it is true
that Complainant may have been qualified for the position, what is also true (and is undisputed) is
that the local office’s practice was to only consider applicants with the highest rating on their last
rating of record. According to the Agency, Complainant failed to satisfy this requirement. That
is why she was not interviewed nor selected. Moreover, argues the Agency, one of the four
selectees, Selectee 1, was Asian.

The Agency asserts that Complainant’s argument regarding the CIS-1495193-ASY position was
immaterial. According to the Agency, it is undisputed that Recommending Official 1 was not
aware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity when she did not recommend Complainant for
selection. The Agency states that Complainant admitted at deposition that she had no evidence
that Recommending Official 1 was aware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity.
                                              10                                      2022000867

The Agency also asserts that Complainant’s argument regarding the CIS-186901-ZLA position
was immaterial, noting that based on Complainant’s interview, Recommending Officials 2 and 3
(both Asian) did not recommend her for selection; and they were not aware of Complainant’s prior
EEO activity. The Agency also notes that one of the four selectees for the position was Asian.

The Agency argues that Complainant’s coverage of coworkers could not have amounted to
harassment. According to the Agency, what Complainant did not mention is that (1) covering for
coworkers was part of the duties of a CIS Assistant and (2) Complainant admitted that she “didn’t
mind covering someone’s duties…” The Agency argues that it is uncontested that Complainant
only provided coverage an average of once every 7.2 workdays i.e., what is, once every one and
one-half weeks. Averaged out over all workdays, according to the Agency, Complainant’s
coverage came to just 23.5 minutes of coverage, hardly the onerous amount of coverage she
alleged. The Agency asserts that if just one of the seventeen CIS Assistants called out sick,
approximately 8 hours of coverage had to be provided. According to the Agency, spread out
equally over the remaining 16 CIS assistants, each CIS Assistant would provide approximately 30
minutes of coverage for just one CIS Assistant absence. These 30-minutes, explains the Agency,
excluded any additional coverage, for example, for a second or third CIS Assistant who calls out
sick, or daily coverage for the lunch and rest breaks, or coverage for CIS Assistants who arrive
late or leave early.

According to the Agency, a look at lunch-time coverage shows that Complainant’s amount of
coverage was, if anything, subpar. The Agency adds that coverage for one 30-minute rest break
for 17 CIS Assistants came to a total of 510 minutes (30 minutes x 16 CIS Assistants). Dividing
this amount of coverage for lunch break evenly among the remaining 16 CIS Assistants came to
31.9 minutes of coverage by each CIS Assistant. The Agency states that Complainant’s actual
average of 23.5 minutes fell below what would be expected on a daily basis simply for lunch breaks
and certainly could not be characterized as severe or pervasive. The Agency requests that the
Commission affirm the AJ’s decision and the Agency’s final order.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

In rendering this appellate decision we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions, and
the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that a
“decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other words,
we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and Agency’s, factual
conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment discrimination
statute was violated. See Id. at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
                                               11                                       2022000867

statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

AJ’s Issuance of a Decision Without a Hearing

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is “genuine”
if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the nonmoving party.
Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105
(1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the outcome of the case. In
rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions, and
the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a)(stating that a
“decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review...”); see
also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO-MD-
110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (as revised, August 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo).

In order to successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a complainant must identify,
with specificity, facts in dispute either within the record or by producing further supporting
evidence and must further establish that such facts are material under applicable law. Such a
dispute would indicate that a hearing is necessary to produce evidence to support a finding that the
agency was motivated by discriminatory animus.

Disparate Treatment Based on Race and Reprisal

A claim of disparate treatment based on indirect evidence is examined under the three-part analysis
first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). The Commission
applies the McDonnell Douglas analysis to complaints involving retaliation claims. Hochstadt v.
Worcester Found, for Experimental Biology Inc., 425 F. Supp. 318, 324 (D. Mass.), aff'd, 545 F.2d
222 (1st Cir. 1976). For Complainant to prevail, he or she must first establish a prima facie (at
first sight) case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to
an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse
employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters,
438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253
(1981). Once the Agency has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to
persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of
a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).
                                               12                                       2022000867

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action at issue, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether Complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC Request No.
05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep’t of Health and Human Serv., EEOC Request No.
05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May
31, 1990).

Non-Selections - First Case (Claim 2)

To prove a prima facie case of discrimination regarding a non-selection, a complainant must show
that: (1) s/he is a member of a protected group; (2) the agency solicited applications for vacancies
for the position at issue; (3) s/he applied for the vacancy and was qualified; (4) despite
complainant’s qualifications, applicant(s) outside his/her protected group were instead selected.
Cain v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120072018 (Jul. 10, 2007).

Here, Selecting Official stated that Complainant was not interviewed for position 1 because only
applicants who had received a rating of “Achieved Excellence” were considered. See ROI 1 at
316-23 for Complainant’s FY 2014 performance appraisal showing that she received an overall
rating of “Exceeds Expectations.”

Second Case (Claims 1 and 2)

For positions 2 and 3, Recommending Officials 2 and 3 asserted that Complainant was not
recommended for selection because her interview responses were not as detailed as those of the
selectees. For position 2, the record includes the interview notes for Selectee 5’s interview
responses which were more substantive, direct, and included more detailed descriptions of her
diverse work experiences than was shown in Complainant’s responses. SROI at 236-38.

One of the interview questions was “Why are you interested in the IA position?” In response,
Selectee 5 discussed in depth her current experience and explaining that she was seeking to gain
further knowledge and have more face-time with applicants. SROI at 236. In response to the same
question, Complainant simply responded, “I want to learn new skills and challenge myself.”
Complainant’s responses to the other interview questions also lacked detail. SROI at 83-4.

Also included in the record are the interview notes for Complainant’s interview for position 3
which show that Complainant’s responses lacked detail. ROI 2 at 306-309. The record contains
interview notes for three other applicants showing that they provided more in- depth responses
with substantive explanations. ROI 2 at 292-95, 299-302, and 315-18.
                                               13                                      2022000867

The Agency has articulated a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for its action. We next turn to
Complainant to show pretext.

Complainant argued that the Agency’s explanations were pretextual, asserting that her non-
selections were based on her race and prior EEO activity. However, Complainant did not refute
management’s explanations with any corroborating evidence. Nor did she show that applicants
who did not receive a rating of “Achieved Excellence” were interviewed for position 1. Besides,
for position 1, Selectee 4, like Complainant, is Asian. For position 3, Selectee 6 is also Asian.

Complainant argued that she was more qualified than Selectee 5 for position 2, asserting that
Selectee 5 was a federal contractor at the time of her application, and did not meet the time-in-
grade requirements. However, management stated that Selectee 5 also met the time-in-grade
requirement for the position as she has worked at the Agency since October 2011. See SROI at 66-
7 and 80 for statements provided by Recommending Official 2 and Selecting Official. (See also
SROI at 274-76 for Selectee 5’s resume that supports management’s statements that she was
indeed qualified for the position).

EEOC case law is replete with cases supporting the principle that, absent a showing that
Complainant was the best-qualified candidate, management did not demonstrate discriminatory
animus when the most qualified candidates were selected. See e.g., Judson v. Dep't of Veterans
Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141750 (May 26, 2016) (declining to find a pretext of discriminatory
action when the Complainant was not selected due to his application rating of five out of eight
candidates); Whitfield v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Doc. 0120082612 (July 11, 2012) (finding that
the Complainant failed to show discrimination when the Complainant's qualifications were not
plainly superior to the selectees for two separate postings); King v. Dep't of Veterans Affs., EEOC
Appeal No. 012022423 (Nov. 2, 2012) (Complainant was not ranked among the top candidates
and presented no evidence of pretext).

Regarding reprisal, Complainant argued that her non-selection for position 1 was because she
refused to sign her performance appraisal for FY 2014. She stated that the rating official for the
FY 2014 performance period was her supervisor only for two weeks. However, Complainant
presents no evidence to show that the rating official was not privy to her performance records prior
to the rating. Nor does Complainant demonstrate that her refusal to sign that performance rating
played a role in her non-selection for position 1. Moreover, Complainant did not cite to any agency
policy mandating that she sign her performance appraisal so that her refusal to do so would be
bases for any personnel action or employment harm.

As the AJ aptly noted, the temporal scope between Complainant’s non-selections on January 4,
2016, and February 16, 2017, were too attenuated from her March 5, 2015, EEO contact to
establish a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment actions.
More importantly, however, Recommending Officials 2 and 3 were unaware of Complainant’s
prior EEO activity; and the record is devoid of any evidence that being aware of Complainant’s
prior EEO activity factored into decisions made by Recommending Official 1 and Selecting
Official’s decisions regarding Complainant’s non-selections for positions 1, 2, and 3.
                                                14                                       2022000867

Therefore, Complainant does not prevail because she did not show that she was not selected based
on her protected bases.

Hostile Work Environment – First Case (Claim 1)

To merit a hearing on her claim of discriminatory or retaliatory harassment, Complainant must
raise a genuine issue of material fact as to whether: (1) she belongs to a statutorily protected class;
(2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving
the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on her statutorily protected
classes; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or
effect of unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the
employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further, the incidents
must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant’s]
employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510
U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

The anti-discrimination statutes are not civility codes. Rather, they forbid “only behavior so
objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim’s employment.” Oncale v. Sundowner
Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998). Therefore, to ensure that her harassment claim
survives summary judgment, Complainant must present enough evidence to raise a genuine issue
of material fact as to whether she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive
that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s position would have found the conduct to be hostile
or abusive. Complainant must also raise a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the alleged
management conduct was motivated by unlawful considerations of her protected bases. Indicators
of such discriminatory or retaliatory animus typically include discriminatory statements or past
personal treatment attributable to those responsible for the personnel action that led to the filing of
the complaint, comparative or statistical data revealing differences in treatment across various
protected-group lines, unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard procedures
without explanation or justification, or inadequately explained inconsistencies in the evidentiary
record. Mellissa F. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12, 2015). Only if
Complainant raises genuine issues of material fact as to both of those elements, hostility and
motive, can the question of Agency liability for discriminatory or retaliatory harassment be
brought before an AJ for a hearing.

Here, Complainant asserts that she established a prima facie case of hostile work environment,
arguing that she has demonstrated that the alleged management conduct in having her cover her
coworker's assignments was objectively severe and pervasive. Complainant also describes
incidents involving performance feedback. These include management moving up Complainant's
deadlines, telling Complainant that she needed more training and needed to log her work daily,
and giving Complainant a mid-cycle review.
                                               15                                       2022000867

Regarding these alleged management conduct, however, Complainant’s arguments fail because
the Commission recognizes that ordinary managerial and supervisory duties include assuring
compliance with agency policy and procedures, monitoring subordinates, scheduling the workload,
scrutinizing and evaluating performance, providing job-related advice and counsel, taking action
in the face of performance shortcomings, and to otherwise manage the workplace. Erika H. v.
Dep’t of Transp., EEOC Appeal No. 0120151781 (Jun. 16, 2017). We find that many of the
allegations stated in Complainant’s complaint fall within these types of management prerogatives,
and Complainant has not shown how she was treated differently than others who were similarly
situated and outside of her protected classes. Notably, other CIS Assistants were required to cover
coworkers’ assignment in their absence; and many of those coworkers were, like Complainant,
Asian.

We also note that the Commission has posited that for a hostile work environment claim to be
actionable, the conduct must be more than merely offensive, it must exceed “casual comments,
rude or derogatory remarks, and conduct motivated by personal animosity or personal feud” and
the conduct must materially change the terms and conditions of employment and be more than an
inconvenience or a change in job responsibility. Sealey v. Affiliated Computer Servs., Inc., No.
11-cv-489, 2012, W.D.N.Y. (Mar. 6, 2012). Here, while it may have felt offensive to Complainant
that her supervisors, if true, falsely accused her of talking on her phone and texting while at work,
and of having attitude and time management problems, these actions do not constitute actionable
harassment. Taken together, the totality of the alleged management conduct as described by
Complainant also lack the requisite severity or pervasiveness to sustain her hostile work
environment claims.

Upon careful review of the AJ’s decision and the evidence of record, as well as the parties’
arguments on appeal, we conclude that the AJ correctly determined that the preponderance of the
evidence did not establish that Complainant was subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile
work environment by the Agency as alleged. Therefore, Complainant’s claims fail, and she is not
entitled to her requested remedies.

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final order adopting and fully
implementing the AJ’s decision.
                                               16                                       2022000867

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 17                                       2022000867

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature\
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 21, 2023
Date
