              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                            Wanita Z, 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                         Kilolo Kijakazi,
                                     Acting Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                             Agency.

                                    Request No. 2023001009

                                     Appeal No. 2021003946

                                 Agency No. DAL-20-0549-SSA

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021003946 (November 8, 2023).
EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as an Attorney-Advisor, GS-0905-12, at the
Agency’s Office of Hearing Operations Regional Office - Region VI in Dallas, Texas.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, claiming discrimination and a hostile work environment
based on sex and in reprisal for prior protected activity. Complainant alleged that, while she was
tasked with writing a grievance decision, the Regional Chief Administrative Law Judge indicated
Complainant’s draft was fine but Complainant’s manager marked it up, and Complainant’s
manager yelled at Complainant for over an hour because Complainant went to the Regional
Chief Administrative Law Judge for work-related guidance.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2023001009

Complainant alleged the Agency put negative language in her mid-year performance review;
Complainant’s manager tried to persuade Complainant to rewrite a union-management
grievance; Complainant’s manager changed Complainant’s workload and denied her training; the
Agency left Complainant off the Best Qualified List for a Quality Review position and
Complainant was not interviewed for the position; Complainant was not selected for a detail;
Complainant’s manager marked up Complainant’s assignments and yelled at Complainant when
she went to the Regional Chief Law Judge for advice; Complainant’s manager made a sudden
effort to find Complainant relevant work assignments; and Complainant’s manager manufactured
evidence regarding emails, which inaccurately described their conversations, workload tracking
changes, and decreased workload, false accusations, work conditions, work assignments,
training, and Performance, Assessment, Communication System (PACS) appraisal. Complainant
also alleged that her was decreased; Complainant was notified of tracking changes to her
workload; Complainant was assigned a new workload and was not provided training on the new
workload; and Complainant received a rating of “3” in all categories for her PACS appraisal.

After an investigation, Complainant requested a final Agency decision. Thereafter, the Agency
issued a final decision concluding the evidence of record did not establish any discrimination,
reprisal, or a hostile work environment. Complainant appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2021003946, the Commission affirmed the Agency’s final decision finding
no discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile work environment.

In the instant request for reconsideration, we have carefully reviewed Complainant’s arguments.
We note that during the original appeal from the Agency’s final order, Complainant presented
extensive arguments. We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to
the Commission. Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A (Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC
Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20, 2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to
demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material
fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the
Agency. Complainant has not done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021003946 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on this request.



              COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision.
                                                3                                     2023001009

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 19, 2023
Date
