              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                           Lorita S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                          Secretary,
                                    Department of Defense
                              (Defense Threat Reduction Agency),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2019000493

                                   Agency No. DTRA170004

                                           DECISION

On September 4, 2018, 2 Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
July 13, 2018, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the matter for a supplemental
investigation.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the record is adequately developed to allow the Commission to
determine whether the Agency discriminated against Complainant on the basis of sex (sex
stereotyping, gender identity) when it denied her access to the women's restroom; installed privacy
panels in the women's restroom; denied her training, career development opportunities, and
promotional opportunities; and denied her monetary, time off, and other recognition awards.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  Complainant initially sent her appeal to an obsolete EEOC address. The document was returned
to her and she subsequently mailed the appeal to the correct address. The Agency has not
challenged the timeliness of the appeal.
                                              2                                      2019000493


                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Lead Intelligence
Operations Specialist, GS-0132-14, in the Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM)
Branch, Security Operations Division, Security and Counterintelligence (CI) Department, of the
Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), at Fort Belvoir, Virginia.

Complainant contacted an EEO Counselor on January 23, 2017. On March 8, 2017, she filed an
EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the basis of sex (sex
stereotyping, gender identity). 3 Report of Investigation (ROI) at 30-33. The Agency identified
the accepted claims as follows:

        1.    Whether you suffered disparate treatment on the basis of sex (sex stereotyping,
              gender identity) when, on or about January 10, 2017, you learned that Agency
              leadership installed privacy panels (astragals or molding strips on the stall doors)
              in the women's restroom, but not in restrooms designated as male or transgender. 4

        2.    Whether you were subjected to an ongoing pattern of disparate treatment on the
              basis of sex (sex stereotyping, gender identity) from 2007 to present, when the
              Agency:

              a. denied you access to restrooms corresponding to your gender
              identity;

              b. denied you training, career development opportunities and
              promotional opportunities; and

              c. denied you monetary, time off, and other recognition awards.

Id. at 114.




3
  According to the EEO Counselor's Report, Complainant was not offered an opportunity to
participate in an alternative dispute resolution (ADR) procedure during pre-complaint counseling.
Report of Investigation at 34.
4
  There were no restrooms designated specifically for use by transgender persons. Rather, there
was what the Agency described as a “family” restroom that would accommodate only one user at
a time.
                                               3                                        2019000493

Claims 1 and 2a

Complainant began working at the Agency in 2002. In November 2006, she informed her then-
immediate supervisor that she was transgender and would be transitioning to female in the next
two years. In December 2006, she told the Director of Security and Counterintelligence (S2B),
and formally notified Personnel Security on January 25, 2007. Complainant changed her name in
December 2007, and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) officially recorded her gender
as female on February 8, 2008. According to Complainant, she sent a January 11, 2008, email to
the Security and Counterintelligence workforce explaining her transition and that she would be
presenting as a female on January 14, 2008. Id. at 184-85.

Approximately one week before she began presenting as female, Complainant spoke with
managers and individuals in the Agency's EEO Office about restroom use. Id. at 185.
Management put a lock on a single-user bathroom on the building's first floor and told Complainant
that she could use that bathroom or the men's restroom. Id. According to S2B, they "mutually
came up" with a plan for Complainant to use the single-user bathroom and Complainant "seemed
satisfied with the arrangement." Id. at 298.

The Acting Director of DTRA (M1) stated that she became aware that Complainant was
transitioning because the Agency changed a first-floor restroom to accommodate Complainant.
She believed that the Agency replaced the "Women" sign on the door with "Family Restroom" and
also installed a baby changing station in the restroom. M1 asserted that the Agency's "intent was
to be as discreet as possible to protect Complainant's privacy." Id. at 230.

Such was the state of affairs until October 7, 2009, when Complainant sent an email to the EEO
Complaints Manager (E1) stating that she had had to wait 15 minutes to use the restroom that the
Agency had assigned to her and that it was not the first time that she had to wait a long time to use
the restroom. She asserted that she once had to wait 35 minutes because someone had locked the
door and gone to sleep in the restroom. She also asserted that she had "spent the past 20 months
dealing with broken seats, delays in use[,] and closure for maintenance." Noting that this restroom
was not an equal alternative, Complainant asked whether the Agency wanted her to use the female
or male restrooms. Id. at 209.

Complainant discussed the matter with E1 on December 30, 2009, after which E1 spoke with the
DTRA General Counsel. E1 sent Complainant a December 30, 2009, email stating, "You can
continue to use the bathroom set aside for your use and still have the right to use the men's room.
According to our GC, he indicated that we go by the external genitalia. If you are pre-surgical you
still use the facilities of your external gender." Id. at 210.

Complainant continued in this situation for an additional 17 months. Then, in a June 8, 2011,
email to the Agency's EEO Office, Complainant asked the Agency to reconsider its decision
requiring her to use the men's rather than women's restroom.
                                              4                                       2019000493

She noted that she had experienced "occasional, but consistent confrontations in the men's
restrooms" and that bathroom facilities had been unavailable to her "for as few as three minutes,
frequently five to ten minutes, and on one occasion, thirty-two minutes." She attached a copy of
OPM's Guidance Regarding the Employment of Transgender Individuals in the Federal
Workplace. The then-Director of EEO and Diversity Programs (EO1) replied on June 30, 2011,
that, in accordance with OPM guidance, "employees should utilize the facilities consistent with
their gender identity." Id. at 269-70. Complainant then began using the women’s restroom.

In 2014, the Security and Counterintelligence Department was reorganized and Complainant's
TSCM Branch was transferred from the CI Division to the Security Operations Division. See id.
at 193, 204-06, 316-17, 320-30. On May 31, 2015, Complainant's position title was changed from
GS-0132-14 Supervisory Intelligence Operations Specialist to GS-0132-14 Lead Intelligence
Operations Specialist. See id. at 49.

In Spring 2016, a female employee met with the Director of EEO and Diversity Programs (EO2)
and expressed concerns about Complainant using the women's restroom. EO2 explained that the
Agency was following OPM guidance. The employee then met with the M1. According to M1,
the employee stated that several other female employees also were uncomfortable with
Complainant's use of the restroom and asked that the Agency install privacy strips. 5 M1 discussed
the recent OPM guidance and told the employee that Complainant had the right to use the restroom
of her choice. After the meeting, M1 asked EO2 to work with the facilities department and to find
out how much it would cost to install privacy panels. 6 EO2 got an estimate and then had panels
installed on the stalls in the women's restroom. Panels were not installed in the men's restroom. 7
Id. at 36-37, 231-32, 240-41.

M1 stated that Complainant never raised any concerns about the panels with M1. She also stated
that "[i]t seemed a logical, compassionate, accommodating and easy fix to alleviate the concerns
of these women by installing the privacy strips." She asserted that the Agency did not install the
panels to discriminate against Complainant but, instead, "to satisfy the complaints and concerns of
the other women." According to M1, "this solution allowed everyone to comfortably use the
facilities they were entitled to use."




5
 M1 stated that the same female employee had raised the issue "a few years ago" and that the
Agency did not install privacy strips at that time because of the expense. ROI at 231.
6
 The record refers variously to “privacy strips,” “privacy panels,” and “privacy molding.” Each
of these terms refers to the same thing: strips of material used to block off the gaps between the
door and panels of a restroom stall.
7
 There is no indication in the record that any male employees raised privacy concerns to
management.
                                               5                                       2019000493

She argued that she "was an enthusiastic supporter" of the Agency's Special Emphasis Programs
on LGBTQ 8 issues, had "demonstrated [her] leadership support for LGBTQ," and would not
discriminate against someone based on transgender status. Id. at 232-33.

EO2 stated in his affidavit that the Agency installed privacy panels in the women's restroom
because of a complaint that the gaps between the stalls were too big. According to EO2, the female
employee who complained about Complainant's use of the women's restroom was the only woman
who complained. The panels were installed only in the women's restroom because "[t]his was only
bought up about the women's restroom." He did not recall whether the Agency had notified
employees that Complainant had a right to use the women's restroom. Id. at 240-42.

Complainant continued to use the women’s restroom. She stated that, in January 2017, she was in
the women's restroom and overheard a woman say that she was glad that the Agency had installed
the panels "because of the 'tranny.'" Complainant asserted, "By installing the privacy strips, the
agency sent a message to everyone in this agency that I am a pervert and that all I want to do is go
into the women's restroom to peek into the stalls." Complainant argues that the Agency did not
prepare her co-workers for her transition and did not tell them that she had a right to use the
women's restroom. She asserts that, rather than install the panels, the Agency should have told the
complaining employee that the employee could use the single-user restroom. Id. at 187, 189.

Claims 2b and 2c

In addition, Complainant stated that her "definition of career development is training
opportunities" and alleged that the Agency denied her such opportunities. She asserted that CI
agents were supposed to receive 40 hours of specific training per year but "[w]e have not received
this training since 2011 or 2013," that another female employee had not received the training, that
the Agency had sent contract employees for training, and that her training requests "are generally
ignored." She argued that, although the Agency provides one-day, in-house training for everyone,
the training does not meet regulatory requirements. Complainant also argued that the Agency
denied her requests to attend "Black Hat and Depth Com Hacker Conventions," but she
acknowledged that no one had been permitted to attend the conventions "in recent years." Id. at
191-94.

With respect to promotional opportunities, Complainant noted that she applied for the position of
Supervisory Intelligence Operations Specialist in September 2009, January 2010, and March 2010.
Her name was referred to the selecting official, but the Agency cancelled the vacancy
announcement each time. When the Agency announced the position for a fourth time, Complainant
could not apply because the new announcement required applicants to have a bachelor's degree.
Complainant stated that, in addition, a Chief of Security position available during the 2014
reorganization went to the man who became her boss.


8
  The parties variously refer to “LGBT” or “LGBTQ,” that is, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
Transgender, Queer. The Commission refers to “LGBTQI+,” to include Intersex and other sexual
orientations or gender identities.
                                               6                                       2019000493

She stated that she did not apply for a "2014/2015" GS-14 Counterintelligence position because it
would have been a lateral move rather than a promotion. Id. at 195-97.

In response to the EEO Investigator's question about why she had not contacted an EEO Counselor
within 45 days of the denial of training and career-development and promotional opportunities,
Complainant stated:

        I went to [the Deputy Inspector General] and EEO and said there was something
        fishy. I did not tell them I wanted to file an EEO complaint. They told me
        management has the prerogative to change things. I got a lot of excuses citing
        managerial prerogative and that I was not discriminated against. 9

Id. at 197.

With respect to the denial of awards, Complainant stated that she received a 5.0 on her performance
ratings and monetary awards for the ratings before Agency officials knew of her transgender status.
After they knew, she received 3.0 ratings and no awards. She asserted that a supervisor told her
that there was a new rating scale and managers would no longer be inflating ratings. Id. at 197-
98.

The Deputy Chief of the Security and Counterintelligence Department (S3B), who was
Complainant's first-line supervisor from July 2010 to December 2014, stated that the Agency
reorganized the Department and decreased the number of branches under Security from three to
two and the number of branches under CI from three to two. He also stated that Agency leadership
transferred the TSCM Branch from the CI Division to the Security Division so that each division
would have two branches. He asserted that Complainant "was given an opportunity to attend every
TSCM training she requested" when he was her supervisor. He was not aware of any mandatory
training that Complainant requested but was denied. According to S3B, the Black Hat and Depth
Com Hacker training was not mandatory and funding was not available for Complainant to attend
it. He stated that, when he was her first-level supervisor, he gave Complainant a 3.0 evaluation
rating based on her performance and that her evaluations were not high enough for a monetary
award. Id. at 277-82.

The Chief of the Security Operations Branch (S1), who has been Complainant's first-level
supervisor since June 2014, stated that he authorized Complainant's attendance at the "NATIA
conference" in fiscal years 2015 and 2016. He asserted that Complainant did not receive less
training than any other member of the Technical Surveillance Countermeasures Team received.
S1 stated that he signed a form authorizing high voltage training, CPR, and first-aid training on
May 20, 2015; he did not know why it was not executed. He also stated that he submitted
Complainant for three trainings, including forensic locksmith training, in fiscal year 2017 "but she
never went to these trainings."


9
  In her affidavit, EO1 stated that she was not aware of any issues Complainant had regarding
training, career development, promotional opportunities, or awards. ROI at 266-67.
                                               7                                        2019000493

S1 acknowledged that, when he first became Complainant's supervisor, he denied Complainant's
training requests because she had told him that she was trying to get disability retirement and he
did not want to waste training funds if she were going to retire. He stated that Complainant's
requests to attend the Black Hat and Depth Com Hacker conventions were denied because the
conventions were not relevant to her job. S1 also stated that he gave Complainant a rating of 3.5
in each of the three evaluations that he gave her, that the rating was based on her performance, that
it was higher than the ratings that he gave to the other TSCM team members, and that Complainant
had received the highest ratings of the TSCM team since he became the supervisor in June 2014.
He noted that Complainant is one of two employees whom he rates under the Defense Civilian
Intelligence Personnel System (DCIPS) and that the DCIPS "has more rating elements and is a
harder system." He rated Complainant based on the work that he saw her perform. Id. at 307-312.

The former Deputy Chief for Security and Counterintelligence stated that he ordered a
reorganization in 2013 and moved Complainant's Branch to the Security Division. He stated that
he "briefed it up the chain of command and it was approved." He did not consider placing
Complainant in the Chief of the Security Division position because "the position required a heavy
security background." Id. at 316-17.

A Security Operations Technician, who stated that Complainant had been her first-level supervisor
before the reorganization, described Complainant as "a stellar employee." She stated that most of
her training requests have been ignored and that she has been denied training, but not as often as
Complainant has been. She also stated that, since Complainant's transition, neither she nor
Complainant has received any awards. With respect to performance appraisals, she noted, "In our
division, no one gets a 5.0 anymore." Id. at 363, 367-68.

LGBTQI+ Inclusion

According to M1, the Agency "was one of the first agencies to put on a Special Emphasis Program
presentation for LGBTQ when new legislation/regulations were implemented and we did this for
at least 2-3 years thereafter." Id. at 230. EO1 stated that, after OPM issued its Guidance Regarding
the Employment of Transgender Individuals in the Federal Workplace, she added the information
to EEO training for supervisors and new employees. Id. at 265. In response to the EEO
Investigator's question about whether the Agency provided transgender-related training to current
employees, EO1 stated that the Agency "had monthly celebrations in June, in which we discussed
this subject to ensure education and we held diversity sessions surrounding the topic, in addition
to the standard courses." Id. at 267. EO2 stated that the Agency holds routine briefings about
discrimination issues, including LGBTQ matters, and that he organized an agency-wide LGBTQ
panel presentation in June 2016. Id. at 245. He provided a copy of the agenda; a three-page
"Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Pride Month Did You Know" document; and the
PowerPoint presentation. Id. at 250-63. S3B and S2B confirmed that LGBTQ matters were
covered in the EEO training that they attended. Id. at 277, 300. According to S1, the Agency
offers presentations during "LGBTQ week," but the EEO training that he attended in January 2015
when he became a supervisor did not address LGBTQ matters. Id. at 306.
                                               8                                      2019000493

According to an Investigator's Memorandum, the Agency did not provide several documents that
the EEO Investigator requested. These documents include the following:

     •   Agency's policies and guidelines on transitioning transgender employees into the
         workplace;
     •   Agency's restroom policies for transgender employees;
     •   Listing of training offered to managers and supervisors on LGBT issues, annotated to note
         if it was mandatory training;
     •   Listing of training offered to employees on LGBT issues, annotated to note if it was
         mandatory training;
     •   Listing of presentations given to employees, supervisors, and managers on LGBT issues,
         annotated to note if attendance was mandatory;
     •   Copies of information the Agency has sent to employees concerning LGBTs in the
         workplace;
     •   Listing of the performance ratings S1 issued to his employees for fiscal years 2015 and
         2016;
     •   Listing showing which employees under S1 have received monetary, time off, and on the
         spot awards in fiscal years 2015 and 2016; and
     •   Listing showing the trainings S1 approved for his employees in fiscal years 2015 and 2016.

Id. at 381-82.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing
within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Therein, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to
prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

Final Agency Decision

In its final agency decision (FAD), the Agency dismissed claim 2b on the ground that Complainant
did not raise the claim in a timely manner. The Agency noted that Complainant applied for the
position of Supervisory Intelligence Operations Specialist in September 2009, January 2010, and
March 2010 but did not contact an EEO Counselor until seven years later, in January 2017. 10

The Agency found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of sex discrimination with
respect to the 2014 reorganization that transferred the TSCM Team to the Security Operations
Division.


10
   In dismissing claim 2b on procedural grounds, the Agency referred only to the promotional-
opportunities aspect of the claim. The Agency addressed the training aspect of the claim when it
discussed the merits of Complainant's complaint.
                                               9                                       2019000493

In that regard, the Agency found that it treated Complainant the same way that it treated all of the
other members of the TSCM Team and that there was no link between Complainant's sex and the
reorganization.

The Agency further found that the installation of privacy panels in the female bathroom was not
the result of discriminatory animus. According to the Agency, the panels "were intended to make
all female employees feel comfortable using the female bathroom without interfering with the
new" OPM policy concerning transgender individuals' use of female bathrooms. The Agency
noted that it had educated the female employee who had complained about the policy and
concluded that the privacy panels "were a benign act to ensure other employees felt comfortable
with the change, without [a]ffecting [Complainant's] rights."

The Agency also concluded that management had a "legitimate, nondiscriminatory reaction" to
Complainant's request for access to restrooms of the gender with which she identifies. The Agency
noted that Complainant agreed to management's 2008 offer that she use the single-user, unisex
bathroom on the first floor. It also noted that, after Complainant contacted the EEO office about
the new OPM guidelines in June 2011, EO1 issued a directive stating that a transitioning employee
may use the appropriate restroom and created training to educate supervisors and employees on
the new policy.

With respect to Complainant's training requests, the Agency stated that management allowed
Complainant to attend all training that was necessary to maintain her certifications and that it
treated her in the same way that it treated similarly situated employees. It noted that Complainant
had not attended some of the "numerous" training courses that management had approved. The
Agency acknowledged that there was "some confusion" about why management had denied
Complainant's requests for DEFCOM and Blackhat Hacker training, but it found that
management's actions concerning Complainant's training requests were legitimate and
nondiscriminatory.

The Agency similarly concluded that management's actions concerning Complainant's
performance ratings were legitimate and nondiscriminatory. It stated that Complainant was rated
under the General Schedule in 2002-2005, under the Department of Defense National Security
Personnel System in 2006-2011, and under the DCIPS after that. It noted that no employee in the
TSCM Branch received a rating that was higher than Complainant's rating and that there was no
evidence that anyone received an "Outstanding" rating.

Finally, the Agency found that Complainant did not establish pretext because she did not show
that management's actions were untruthful or that management acted with discriminatory intent.
Accordingly, the Agency found that Complainant did not establish that it discriminated against her
with respect to the claims raised in her complaint.
                                               10                                       2019000493

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Noting that the FAD spelled her first name incorrectly, Complainant asserts that the Agency paid
little attention to detail and reached an erroneous decision. She argues that the Agency
"accommodate[d] other people's prejudices and discomfort" when it installed the privacy panels
in the women's restrooms. She asserts that M1 and EO2 told her that the Agency installed the
panels to make "other women feel comfortable."

Complainant also asserts that she was the only Counterintelligence Supervisory Intelligence
Operations Specialist who was transferred to the Security Operations Division. According to
Complainant, "a black female, an elderly gentleman, and a non-stereotypical female" were
transferred to the Security Operations Division while a female Supervisory Intelligence Research
Specialist remained in the Counterintelligence Division. She argues that the reorganization "was
an activity, not a reason nor a justification." She asserts that the former Deputy Chief for Security
and Counterintelligence, who had worked for EO2, decided her placement in the reorganization.

In addition, Complainant argues that the Agency erroneously dismissed claim 2b as untimely
raised. She asserts that M1 and EO2 were members of the board that decided to re-advertise the
position she had sought and that it was not until she heard EO2 ask, "Are they all in" that she
realized that they wielded decision-making authority over her position, training, salary, and
bonuses. She also asserts that, when she began her transition in 2008 and asked the Agency's EEO
Office to provide employees with LGBT training, the Chief of Equal Opportunity and Diversity
Programs told her that she did not "'have any protections and that [she] 'hadn't suffered enough.'"
Complainant argues that the Agency should not have dismissed the claim as untimely because she
"clearly stated that members of the EEO office told [her] throughout this ordeal that the
commander's prerogative is not discrimination."

In response, the Agency reiterates the findings and conclusions of its final decision. The Agency
argues that it did not treat Complainant differently because of her transition to female and that it
"diligently worked with Complainant as policy on this issue matured and attempted to educate the
work force as the policy changed." In addition, it maintains that the personnel acts that
Complainant challenges "are on their face obviously non-discriminatory." The Agency asks us to
affirm its final decision.

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).
                                               11                                       2019000493

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

In Bostock v. Clayton County, the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual
orientation or transgender status violates Title VII’s prohibition on discrimination “because of …
sex.” 590 U.S. __; 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020). “Title VII's message is ‘simple but momentous’: An
individual employee’s sex is ‘not relevant to the selection, evaluation, or compensation of
employees.’” Id. at 1741 (quoting Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 239 (1989)).
Likewise, “[a]n individual’s homosexuality or transgender status is not relevant to employment
decisions. That’s because it is impossible to discriminate against a person for being homosexual
or transgender without discriminating against that individual based on sex.” Id. Therefore, “an
employer who intentionally treats a person worse because of sex—such as by firing the person for
actions or attributes it would tolerate in an individual of another sex—discriminates against that
person in violation of Title VII.” Id. at 1740.

This holding is consistent with earlier decisions by the Commission, which found that
discrimination based on transgender status is, by definition, discrimination "based on sex." Macy
v. Dep't of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0120120821 (Apr. 20, 2012). Thus, an Agency cannot
discriminate against, harass, or allow others to harass an employee based on the employee’s gender
identity. Lusardi v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120133395 (Apr. 1, 2015).

Further, in Lusardi, the Commission held that recognition of an individual’s gender identity does
not require that the individual has undergone gender confirmation surgery. A transgender
employee must be allowed to use the restroom corresponding with their gender identity. Lusardi,
supra. As the Commission explained,

       We recognize that certain employees may object--some vigorously--to
       allowing a transgender individual to use the restroom consistent with his or
       her gender identity. Some, like the Agency decision makers in this case,
       may not believe a transgender woman is truly female, and thus entitled or
       eligible to use a female bathroom, unless she has had gender reassignment
       surgery. Some co-workers may be confused or uncertain about what it
       means to be transgender, and/or embarrassed or even afraid to share a
       restroom with a transgender co-worker.

       But supervisory or co-worker confusion or anxiety cannot justify
       discriminatory terms and conditions of employment. Title VII prohibits
       discrimination based on sex whether motivated by hostility, by a desire to
       protect people of a certain gender, by gender stereotypes, or by the desire to
       accommodate other people's prejudices or discomfort. . . . Allowing the
       preferences of co-workers to determine whether sex discrimination is valid
       reinforces the very stereotypes and prejudices that Title VII is intended to
       overcome.

Id. (footnotes and citations omitted).
                                                12                                      2019000493

After a thorough review of the record, we find that the evidence before us is insufficient to
determine whether the Agency discriminated against Complainant on the basis of sex when it
installed privacy panels in the women's restroom. We conclude that further development of the
record is warranted. 11

As noted above, the Agency did not provide several documents that the EEO Investigator
requested, including copies of Agency policies regarding transitioning transgender employees,
restroom policies for transgender employees, and information provided to employees on
LGBTQI+ matters. That information could be relevant here, where the Agency's motivation is at
issue. We note, for example, that EO2 and M1 stated that they told the complaining employee that
the Agency was following OPM guidance and that Complainant had a right to use the women's
restroom. It is not clear, however, whether and to what extent the Agency took steps to educate
the employee and other staff about Complainant's right to equal access to restrooms. It similarly
is not clear whether the Agency's own policies addressed Complainant's restroom access.
Moreover, it is not clear why M1 initially denied the complaining employee's request because of
the expense involved, but subsequently acceded to the request. M1 asserted that it was a
"compassionate" way to alleviate other women's concerns, but the record does not disclose whether
any employees raised any privacy concerns before Complainant began using the women's
restroom. In short, it is not clear whether the Agency installed the panels out of a genuine respect
for privacy or whether the asserted privacy interests in this case are simply a disguise for unlawful
bias against a transgender woman based on coworker prejudice. In this regard, we note the
allegation that Complainant overheard a coworker refer to her as a “tranny.”

Accordingly, we remand this matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation. On remand,
the Agency shall provide the documents that the EEO Investigator requested, including the
Agency's policies on transitioning transgender employees and copies of information that the
Agency has provided to employees regarding LGBTQI+ matters. The Agency also shall provide
information describing the steps that it took, if any, to educate staff about transgender employees'
equal access to restrooms. In addition, the Agency shall investigate whether any employee raised
privacy concerns about restrooms prior to Complainant's use of the women's restroom. To the
extent necessary, the Agency shall obtain affidavits from management officials and employees
who have relevant information. Complainant shall have the opportunity to submit a rebuttal
affidavit regarding evidence collected during the supplemental investigation.

Finally, we note that the EEO Counselor's Report indicates that the Agency did not offer
Complainant an opportunity to participate in an alternative dispute resolution procedure.
Complainants and agencies "have realized many advantages from utilizing EEO ADR," which
"offers the parties the opportunity for an early, informal resolution of disputes in a mutually
satisfactory fashion." Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 3, § I. (Aug. 5, 2015). We encourage the parties to consider ADR
as a means to resolving the matters raised in this complaint.


11
   In the interest of avoiding piecemeal litigation, we will not address the other issues on appeal at
this time.
                                               13                                     2019000493

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the matter
for a supplemental investigation, consistent with this decision and the ORDER below.

                                            ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions:

       1.     Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency
              is ordered to conduct and complete a supplemental investigation into
              Complainant's discrimination claims. The supplemental investigation shall include,
              at a minimum, the following:

              a.      Documents that the EEO Investigator requested but did not receive from the
                      Agency, including

                      i.      Agency's policies and guidelines on transitioning transgender
                              employees into the workplace;

                      ii.     Agency's restroom policies for transgender employees;

                      iii.    Listing of training offered to managers and supervisors on LGBT
                              issues, annotated to note if it was mandatory training;

                      iv.     Listing of training offered to employees on LGBT issues, annotated
                              to note if it was mandatory training;

                      v.      Listing of presentations given to employees, supervisors, and
                              managers on LGBT issues, annotated to note if attendance was
                              mandatory;

                      vi.     Copies of information the Agency has sent to employees concerning
                              LGBT [individuals] in the workplace;

                      vii.    Listing of the performance ratings S1 issued to his employees for
                              fiscal years 2015 and 2016;

                      viii.   Listing showing which employees under S1 have received
                              monetary, time off, and on the spot awards in fiscal years 2015 and
                              2016; and
                                              14                                      2019000493

                      ix.    Listing showing the trainings S1 approved for his employees in
                             fiscal years 2015 and 2016.

              b.      Information regarding the steps that the Agency took to educate staff about
                      transgender employees' right to equal access to restrooms.

              c.      Information regarding whether any employee raised privacy concerns about
                      restrooms prior to Complainant's use of the women's restroom.

              d.      Information regarding the cost of the installation of privacy panels in the
                      women's restroom that Complainant used.

              e.      Information regarding whether the Agency installed privacy panels in any
                      other restrooms at the facility where Complainant worked. If the Agency
                      did install such panels, then the information shall identify the restroom(s)
                      in which they were installed, the date of the installation(s), and the cost of
                      the installation(s).

              g.      An affidavit from the female employee whose concerns prompted
                      installation of the privacy panels, including the nature of her concerns when
                      she approached management, and management’s response to her; the
                      identities of the other females whose concerns she purported to represent;
                      and the circumstances giving rise to her/their concerns.

              f.      Any evidence and argument Complainant wishes to make in response to the
                      evidence and materials provided in the supplemental investigation.

       2.     Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the Agency completes the
              investigation, the Agency shall issue a new final agency decision, with appeal rights
              to the Commission, on the merits of the entire complaint.

       3.     The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as
              provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”
              The report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29
              C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                               15                                       2019000493

The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded,
and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                                 16                                       2019000493

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                17                                      2019000493

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 3, 2023
Date
