              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                             Cain R, 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Carlos Del Toro,
                                           Secretary,
                                     Department of the Navy,
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2022004918

                                     Appeal No. 2021000778

                               Agency No. DON-19-61449-04776

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021000778 (August 17, 2022).
EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a Firefighter, GS-0081-07, with the Federal
Fire Department at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, claiming discrimination and a hostile work environment
on the bases of disability and age. Complainant alleged that management did not recommend
him for transfer to the Pearl Harbor Fire Station; a Battalion Chief told other firefighters that he
preferred younger firefighters with no disabilities, told management that he did not want to
assign Complainant to the Pearl Harbor Fire Station because of his disability, made derogatory
remarks regarding Complainant’s disability during the selection process for a Lieutenant position


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2022004918

and during the selection process for a Driver/Operator position, and admitted that Complainant
was qualified and certified to be a Lieutenant but continued to make derogatory remarks about
Complainant’s disabilities; Complainant was not selected for a Firefighter-Driver/Operator
position and was not selected for the Lieutenant’s position; Complainant spoke with the Deputy
Fire Chief about the Battalion Chief’s remarks about Complainant’s disability, but no further
action was taken; and Complainant spoke with the Regional Fire Chief regarding gossip about
Complainant always being hurt or injured, but no further action was taken.

After an investigation, Complainant requested a final agency decision. In accordance with
Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision concluding the evidence of record did
not establish discrimination as alleged. Complainant appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2021000778, the Commission affirmed the Agency’s final decision finding
no discrimination.

In the instant request for reconsideration, we have carefully reviewed Complainant’s arguments
and determine that the matters either were raised or could have been raised below. We note that
during the original appeal from the Agency’s final order, Complainant presented extensive
arguments, some of which have been replicated in the instant request. We emphasize that a
request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A
(Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20,
2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021000778 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.
                                                3                                    2022004918

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 14, 2023
Date
