             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Erwin B, 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Merrick B. Garland,
                                       Attorney General,
                                     Department of Justice
                                  (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                            Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2022003106

                                Hearing No. 420-2021-00091X

                                Agency No. BOP-2015-02157


                                          DECISION

On May 16, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
May 11, 2022, final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final order.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was a Teacher, GS-1710-09. at
the Agency’s Federal Correctional Complex (FCC) in Yazoo City, Mississippi. Report of
Investigation (ROI) at 58 and Supplemental ROI (SROI) at 59. Complainant is an Asian-American.
ROI at 61. He asserted that he was the only Asian in the Education Department. According to
Complainant, his supervisors treated him much differently than they did his African American and
Caucasian coworkers. He felt the different treatment he received was because of his race. SROI
at 67-8. Complainant asserted that he did not file a prior EEO claim. ROI at 63.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                        2022003106

He however stated that he was retaliated against after he notified management that he believed the
different treatment he received was race-based on August 12, 2016. SROI at 175-79. Complainant
also believed that he was retaliated against based on his active union membership.

Complainant’s work location is a prison complex comprised of four Institutions: the "Low,” the
"Medium," and the "United States Penitentiary" (USP). Each facility had its own Assistant
Supervisor of Education (ASOE), who was supervised by the Supervisor of Education (SOE). The
Education department operated on one roster and employees and supervisors could be moved
among the facilities as needed, but in general, they were assigned to one institution; each institution
had its own roster and staff and bidding was done based on seniority. There were approximately
20 to 25 teachers and instructors at the complex (including Complainant), along with a handful of
administrative staff. SROI at 8.

An ASOE was Complainant’s first-line supervisor (Supervisor 1A) from his start date of July 1,
2014, until October 2014. ROI at 86. A second ASOE was Complainant’s first-line supervisor
(Supervisor 1B). He served as Complainant's supervisor from October 2014 to approximately
March 2015. ROI at 98-9. Complainant's second-line supervisor (Supervisor 2) was the Supervisor
of Education (SOE). ROI at 93. An Associate Warden (AW) was Complainant's third-line
supervisor (Supervisor 3). ROI at 128-29. A Warden has responsibility for all staff at the Medium
facility where Complainant was assigned. ROI at 137.

Complainant provides examples of the treatment to which he alleged he was subjected at his work
location. Complainant asserted that Supervisor 1A added a performance log regarding an
allegation made by an inmate that he had used the term “you people” to refer to African American
students. SROI at 84-5 and 94. According to Complainant, an inmate in his class started talking
about something in the news regarding killing police. He stated that the topic resulted in a class
discussion; and that a student reported the incident to Supervisor 1A. Complainant asserted that
Supervisor 1A called him into her office the next day and told him not to talk about politics or
current events, reprimanded him for calling his students "you people," and counseled him during
a meeting in her office. ROI at 65-7. Complainant stated that his supervisors decided that he
needed to take a course in communication, which he did. ROI at 60 and 211. Complainant
believed that this was discrimination based on his race because Supervisor 1A is of a different race
and never investigated the incident to see what really happened. ROI at 76.

Complainant’s coworker (later referred to as Coworker 2) stated that African American inmates
approached her and told her they were upset because Complainant called them “you people” and
told them they had not been raised right because they did not have anything growing up, which
required Coworker 2 to separate the inmates from Complainant. SROI at 426. According to
Supervisor 1A, Complainant admitted using the term “you people” in his classroom which upset
African American inmates. She stated that she sent Complainant an email to counsel him about
his behavior. Supervisor 1A believed Complainant had no regard for policy and procedures in a
correctional environment. ROI at 91.
                                               3                                       2022003106

Supervisor 1A went to Complainant’s office to ask why an inmate did not come to class.
Complainant stated that Supervisor 1A demanded that he keep better track of his students; and that
when he tried to explain the situation, she told him to keep better accountability of his students
and walked out of his office.

According to Complainant, on August 12, 2015, he stepped into Supervisor 1A’s office to explain
the situation; and Supervisor 1A brought up the 2014 incident in which she accused Complainant
of calling African Americans "you people."

Complainant stated that Supervisor 1A asked him why he was playing the race card. Complainant
told her he was not, and indicated that she was playing the race card. Complainant stated that he
did raise his voice but did not threaten Supervisor 1A. Complainant asserted that the meeting fell
apart when Supervisor 1A terminated it. Complainant then requested to, and met with the Union.
ROI at 66

Supervisor 1A asserted that she left Complainant’s office when she became fearful after
Complainant raised his voice. Complainant then came to her office, started to rehash old issues,
and told her she was being racist. According to Supervisor 1A, she perceived Complainant as
threatening, and asked him to leave. She asserted that Complainant was given the same directions
and guidance as all her staff, all of whom are of several races. Supervisor 1A stated that
Complainant was the only staff member who responded in a threatening manner. Supervisor 1A
reported the incident to Supervisor 2. ROI at 88 and 178.

On March 13, 2015, Complainant wore a smart watch (Samsung Gear 2) to work. Complainant
stated that a colleague saw this and reported it to the Special Investigative Agent (SIA). According
to Complainant, the SIA called him into the SIA’s office, wrote a report, took a few pictures of the
watch, and told Complainant to put it in Complainant’s car and not to wear it again at work.
Complainant complied. ROI at 251.

On March 31, 2015, the smart watch incident was referred to the Office of Internal Affairs (OIA).
ROI at 250. On April 10, 2015, the OIA deferred further investigation into the incident back to
the Warden. Id. Complainant stated that some four months later, on October 4 or 5, 2015, a
manager took his testimony regarding the incident. The charge of “Unauthorized Electronic
Device Introduction” was subsequently sustained by the SIA against Complainant. Id.
Complainant believed that he was discriminated against based on his race when he was asked to
provide testimony in October 2015, because he could draw no other conclusion since the actual
event occurred in March and he provided testimony in October.

The Warden confirmed Complainant’s statements regarding the investigation, asserting that when
staff become aware of any violation or alleged violation of the standards of conduct it must be
reported to the Warden, OIA or the office of the Inspector General (OIG). Warden stated that
Complainant transferred to another agency prior to completion of the OIA investigation; and that
the case was administratively closed. She asserted that that all staff are subject to investigation
based on allegations of misconduct. ROI at 139-40.
                                               4                                       2022003106

On August 17, 2015, a Threat Assessment Team was formed to investigate the August 12, 2016
incident because Supervisor 1A accused Complainant of being violent toward her. The members
were two Associate Wardens (including Supervisor 3); an Assistant Human Resources Manager;
a Case Manager/Union representative; Supervisor 2; and the Chief Psychologist (Psychologist).
ROI at 179. According to Complainant, the committee determined that his action was not violent
and did not pose any threat of violence, but there was tension between him and Supervisor 1A
which should be monitored. ROI at 67. See ROI at 138-40 for Warden’s statements regarding the
Committee’s determination.

Supervisor 3 stated that Complainant asked to be temporarily moved out of the Education
Department because of his relationship with Supervisor 1A. As such, Complainant was granted a
temporary reassignment to the mailroom at the Low facility. ROI at 131. The Warden confirmed
Supervisor 3’s statements, adding that Complainant discussed with her on several occasions
concerns with his supervisors and peers in the Education Department. She stated that Complainant
requested to be placed back in his position as teacher in the Medium facility on October 19, 2015,
which she approved on October 20, 2015. ROI at 152.

Complainant made initial EEO contact on September 2, 2015. Complainant first filed a formal
complaint in this case on September 25, 2015 (with subsequent amendments on October 8, 2015
and October 14, 2015) alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a
hostile work environment on the bases of race (Asian) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

The Agency conducted an investigation into the complaint. Complainant elected to have a hearing
with an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). On August 26, 2016, the Agency filed a motion seeking
to procedurally dismiss the complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1). In seeking to
procedurally dismiss the complaint, the Agency argued that Complainant was not aggrieved
because he had not offered any evidence that “any term, condition, or privilege of his employment
changed.” The Agency emphasized that “[t]he Complainant has not provided any evidence that
he has suffered any harm, even a trivial one, arising from his claims in this case.”

In a September 7, 2016 Opposition to the Agency’s motion, Complainant argued that claims based
on reprisal need not qualify as an “ultimate employment action” or materially affect the terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment. He emphasized that the prohibition on reprisal apply to
adverse treatment that is based on retaliatory motive and is reasonably likely to deter the charging
party or others from engaging in protected activity.

On June 17, 2019, the assigned AJ (AJ 1) proposed sua sponte to issue a decision without a hearing
because, according to AJ 1, Complainant had not suffered a materially adverse employment action
or established a prima case of discrimination based on race or reprisal. See Notice of Proposed
Summary Judgment, dated June 17, 2019. AJ 1 gave the parties until Friday, July 19, 2019 to
respond to the notice. However, on June 25, 2019, AJ 1 vacated the June 17, 2019, notice and
granted the Agency’s August 26, 2016, motion to dismiss the matter pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.107(a)(1).
                                             5                                     2022003106

AJ 1 granted the Agency’s motion solely on the grounds that Complainant had failed to show that
“he suffered any harm, was subjected to adverse treatment, or suffered adverse employment, as a
result of the Agency’s actions.”

On July 30, 2019, the Agency issued a final order, which fully implemented AJ 1’s procedural
dismissal, albeit under different grounds than AJ 1. While the Agency acknowledged that AJ 1
had dismissed the complaint because there was no materially adverse employment action, the
Agency noted that a complainant alleging a hostile work environment need not demonstrate the
existence of an adverse employment action. To that end, the Agency emphasized that allegations
of harassment, which may not constitute a claim individually, may nevertheless be sufficient to
state a claim when considered collectively. As such, the Agency concluded that AJ 1 should not
have dismissed the complaint due to the absence of an adverse employment action.
Notwithstanding this determination, the Agency found that Complainant could not prevail on his
hostile work environment claim because Complainant’s allegations consisted of everyday
workplace interactions that were insufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute a hostile work
environment. Furthermore, the Agency found that Complainant could not show that the alleged
incidents were due to discriminatory or retaliatory animus.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2019005414, the Commission found that AJ 1 erred in granting the Agency’s
motion to procedurally dismiss the complaint based on Complainant’s purported lack of aggrieved
status. The Commission noted the Agency’s finding that Complainant raised a harassment/hostile
work environment claim based on race and reprisal for his prior protected EEO activity. The
Commission also noted the Agency’s finding that AJ 1 erred in requiring Complainant to show
that the Agency took an adverse employment action against him, as no tangible adverse action is
required in order to state a claim for race or reprisal-based harassment. The Commission vacated
the Agency’s final July 30, 2019 order dismissing Complainant’s complaint, Hearing No. 451-
2015-00101X, and remanded the case for further processing.

In this second filing, Complainant alleged the following 43 incidents of discrimination and
harassment based on his race (Asian) and prior EEO activity (instant complaint):

   1. As late as August 18, 2014, Complainant's supervisor (Supervisor 1A) had failed to provide
      Complainant his 30-day performance standard and Complainant emailed her and let her
      know;

   2. Around September 2, 2014, management reassigned Complainant from "the LOW to the
      MEDIUM;"

   3. Around September 3, 2014, Supervisor 1A told Complainant that there was a consensus in
      the Department that he was making the workplace unsafe and berated Complainant about
      his work effort, "doing too much," and needing to learn more about prison policies.
      Supervisor 1A also commented to Complainant that everyone in the workplace has a
      "Masters or Ph.D" so he should not think too much about his degrees;
                                          6                                      2022003106

4. Around September 3, 2014, another teacher (Coworker 1) said to Complainant "Do you
   know what they say about people with a hard head? They have a soft ass." Coworker 1
   continued to lecture Complainant about his need to “ learn how to crawl before he
   walked;"

5. On September 4, 2014, from 11:32:59 a.m. to 11:56:12 a.m., Supervisor 1A put three
   different notes on Complainant’s personnel file;

6. On or about September 10, 2014, Complainant was accused of referring to African
   American students as "you people;"

7. On or about September 10, 2014, Supervisor 1A counseled and reprimanded Complainant
   allegedly for referring to African American students as you people" and refused his request
   that they go into the classroom to "get to the bottom" of the incident;

8. On or about September 10, 2014, Supervisor 1A put a 4th note on his personnel file;

9. On or about September 10, 2014, Supervisor 1A punished Complainant by instructing him
   to take an online course on how to communicate as a correctional officer;

10. On or about September 10, 2014, Supervisor 1A notified Complainant that he was being
    transferred to FCC Yahoo MEDIUM and would have to work on Saturday, although he
    was not the person with the lowest seniority;

11. On September 12, 2014, Complainant brought dice to the institution (FCC Yazoo City)
    classroom to teach inmates mathematical probability. Supervisor 1A characterized the dice
    as contraband and ordered Complainant to provide a written statement, forced him to
    change his written statement, reprimanded him, and did not allow him to provide a rebuttal
    statement;

12. Around September 24, 2014, Complainant's new supervisor, Supervisor 1B, blocked
    Complainant from bidding for a new post in the next quarter;

13. Around October 2, 2014, Complainant submitted a memo about inmate misconduct (related
    to an APC [undefined acronym] power/converter battery) in which he omitted that
    Supervisor 1A was a witness to the misconduct because he feared she would retaliate
    against him;

14. Around October 2, 2014, upon arriving at the MEDIUM, Complainant asked Supervisor
    1B how Complainant can earn Excellent rating or better in his performance. Supervisor
    1B proceeded to tell Complainant: "You are on your probationary year; you are not going
    to get anything more than a successful;"
                                           7                                      2022003106

15. On October 5, 2015, management informed Complainant that they needed to take his
    testimony for an event that occurred on March 13, 2015;

16. On October 29, 2014, Supervisor 1B put a note in Complainant’s file for switching
    workdays with a coworker and for allegedly failing to follow protocol procedures;

17. On October 29, 2014, Supervisor 1B accused Complainant of leaving work early (after a
    training he attended) despite Complainant protesting that he was the last person out of the
    building;

18. On November 25, 2014, Supervisor 1B gave Complainant a warning for switching days
    with another staff member without confirming the switch with the supervisor;

19. Since becoming Complainant's immediate supervisor, Supervisor 1B instructed two of
    Complainant's colleagues to monitor him and report to management;

20. On January 26, 2016, Supervisor 1B put another note on Complainant's personnel file
    alleging that Complainant had left his post on January 16, 2016 without telling anybody;

21. On February 27, 2015, a second coworker (Coworker 2) monitored Complainant and
    reported to management a mistake he made in failing to turn in paperwork when he returned
    from training;

22. Supervisor 1B continually interferes with Complainant’s classroom instructions and sides
    with inmates, undermining Complainant’s authority and creating a hostile atmosphere for
    him by:

       a. Sending email and engaging in face to face conversations between March 2, 2015
          and March 11, 2015 in which Supervisor 1B relayed to Complainant (and others)
          that they should "take better account" of the students;

       b. Refusing to support Complainant on his decision to implement a hall pass system,
          including entering his classroom, confiscating the hall passes and chastising
          Complainant in front of students; and

       c. Causing seven (7) inmates to walk out of Complainant's classroom;

23. On March 13, 2015, Complainant was reported and investigated for wearing a smart watch
    to work;

24. Around March 17, 2015, Supervisor 1B was removed as the supervisor of MEDIUM and
    replaced by Supervisor 1A, Complainant's former supervisor;
                                          8                                     2022003106

25. Around April 21, 2015, Complainant's temporary supervisor (Supervisor 1C) inquired of
    other staff how Complainant was doing, continued to remind Complainant to "get the
    door," told Complainant that other staff said he did not "get the door" enough and told
    Complainant that he should look in the mirror to see why every supervisor had a problem
    with him (Complainant);

26. On or about April 24, 2015, after a named union representative (Rep) advised Complainant
    that his performance evaluation had to be changed because Supervisor 1B evaluated him
    in the wrong quarter, Supervisor 1B redid Complainant's evaluation and gave him an unfair
    rating;

27. On April 24, 2015, Complainant had a meeting with management during which they
    repeatedly criticized him, told him how he could improve but did not acknowledge his
    extra accomplishments;

28. Around May 14, 2015, Complainant met with Supervisor 1A during which Supervisor 1A
    stressed to Complainant her expectations of him regarding the ESL (English as a Second
    Language) class while failing to address or downplaying Complainant's expressions of
    being overwhelmed by the ESL class;

29. On May 15, 2015, Supervisor 1A took away the camera that Complainant used to perform
    his collateral duties as the unofficial photographer for the MEDIUM;

30. On an unspecified date, Supervisor 1A tore down Complainant's work (in the Education
    Library) that showed his completions, despite his prior supervisor, Supervisor 1B asking
    him to put them up;

31. On unspecified dates, Supervisor 1A unfairly distributed duties among Complainant and
    two other teachers and set unfair graduation goals, knowing the goals were unachievable;

32. On June 15, 2015, Supervisor 1A sent Complainant home and wrote him up for coming
    into work during his off time to attend an inmate activity;

33. On July 10, 2015, management denied Complainant’s request for a spare computer, which
    he needed to utilize the projector;

34. On and around July 16, 2015, management denied Complainant's request to be on the
    Disturbance Control Team;

35. Around July 21, 2015 and August 12, 2015, another teacher (Coworker 3) allowed an
    unruly student to withdraw from her class causing him to sign up for Complainant's class.
    Once in Complainant's class, the student was disruptive, resulting in a dispute between
    Complainant and Supervisor 1A during which she ordered Complainant from her office;
                                             9                                      2022003106

   36. On or about July 31, 2015, Coworker 3, the Literacy Coordinator, prevented 13 inmates
       identified by Complainant from being placed in Complainant's Spanish GED (General
       Education Diploma) class, depriving him of the opportunity to get six completions;

   37. On August 12, 2015, management presented exaggerations and lies pertaining to
       Complainant, thus attacking his character;

   38. On August 17, 2015, Supervisor 1A initiated a Violence in the Workplace complaint
       against Complainant and forced him to meet with the threat assessment committee the same
       day;

   39. On August 18, 2015, after being told by the Agency’s psychologist (Psychologist) to take
       some time off, Complainant returned to work on September 3, 2015 and discovered
       Supervisor 1B and Supervisor 1A falsely claimed they met with Complainant for his 9th
       month progress review (on 7/9/2015) and his final review meeting (on 8/28/2015);

   40. On or about September 3, 2015, after discovering Supervisor 1B’s and Supervisor 1A’s
       false claims about their having met with him, Complainant (afraid of what else they might
       do) requested that his post be changed and he be moved away from Supervisor 1B’s and
       Supervisor 1A’s supervision. Complainant then was demoted and reassigned to the
       mailroom where he worked eight hours per day, sorting and checking inmate mail;

   41. After Complainant returned to work on September 3, 2015 and was reassigned to the
       mailroom (per his request for reassignment allegedly to get away from Supervisor 1A and
       Supervisor 1B), the Agency would not reassign Complainant from the mailroom to another
       position in FCC Yazoo's new high security prison;

   42. On October 5, 2015, management informed Complainant that they needed to take his
       testimony for an event that occurred on March 13, 2015; and

   43. On October 5, 2015, the Agency sustained the charge of Unauthorized Electronic Devise
       Introduction of Complainant, 222 days after the underlying incident took place and 27 days
       after Complainant filed his EEO complaint.

Following a May 7, 2021 order of a second AJ (AJ 2), the Agency conducted an expedited
supplemental investigation from May 12, 2021, through July 8, 2021. At the conclusion of the
investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the supplemental report of
investigation (SROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.
On September 22, 2021, the Agency filed a motion for decision without a hearing. On October 1,
2021, Complainant filed a response. On October 7, 2021, the Agency filed a reply.
                                              10                                      2022003106

According to AJ 2, he considered the Agency’s motion, Complainant’s response, the Agency’s
reply and the entire investigative file and record. AJ 2 also stated that he reviewed the evidence
produced in the Complaint in the light most favorable to Complainant. After reviewing all the
evidence, AJ 2 determined that there were no material facts in dispute, concluding that there was
sufficient information upon which to base a decision without a hearing. Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.109, AJ 2 issued a decision without a hearing in favor of the Agency on April 6, 2022. AJ 2
did not include any factual or specific legal analysis in his decision.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. This appeal followed.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

In his appeal brief, among other things, Complainant contests the AJ’s decision. He asserts that
the AJ only assigned 2 months to his case that Complainant terms “complicated” because of the
two ROIs of over 1500 pages. Complainant criticizes the investigative and hearing processes,
referring to both as flawed, incomplete, or downright done in bad faith.

As a supporting example for his criticism, Complainant cites to the removal of Supervisor 1B and
his replacement by Supervisor 1A (claim 24). According to Complainant, none of the “friendly”
or “corroborating” witnesses he identified were interviewed by the EEO Investigator. He also
asserts that had the AJ not dismissed his case without a hearing, other supporting facts could have
been “made available” that the AJ could have reviewed “in light most favorable” to Complainant.

Complainant restates the Commission’s reasons for previously remanding this case for further
processing.

According to Complainant, all of the reasons outlined by the Commission are still valid; and he
disputes the new reasons presented by the Agency for a motion for dismissal without a hearing
this time.

The Agency did not submit an appeal brief.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Preliminary matter

In his appeal brief, Complainant criticized the investigative and hearing processes, referring to
both as flawed, incomplete, or downright done in bad faith. Complainant also stated that none of
the “friendly” or “corroborating” witnesses he identified were interviewed by the EEO Investigator.
However, upon review, the Commission finds that the investigative record in this case with respect
to Complainant’s harassment allegations is adequate. Therefore, the Commission can make a
reasoned determination on the merits of the complaint for those allegations.
                                                11                                      2022003106

The Commission's regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is “genuine”
if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-moving party.
Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105
(1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the outcome of the case. In
rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions, and
the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a)(stating that a
“decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review…”); see
also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-
110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s determination
to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed de novo).

In order to successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a complainant must identify,
with specificity, facts in dispute either within the record or by producing further supporting
evidence and must further establish that such facts are material under applicable law. Such a
dispute would indicate that a hearing is necessary to produce evidence to support a finding that the
Agency was motivated by discriminatory animus. Here, however, Complainant has failed to
establish such a dispute. Even construing any inferences raised by the undisputed facts in favor of
Complainant, a reasonable factfinder could not find in Complainant’s favor.

Hostile Work Environment

To merit a hearing on his claim of discriminatory or retaliatory harassment, Complainant must
raise a genuine issue of material fact as to whether: (1) he belongs to a statutorily protected class;
(2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving
the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was based on his statutorily protected classes;
(4) the harassment affected a term or condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with the work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive work environment; and (5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. See
Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further, the incidents must have been
“sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant’s] employment and create
an abusive working environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

The antidiscrimination statutes are not civility codes. Rather, they forbid “only behavior so
objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim’s employment.” Oncale v. Sundowner
Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998). Therefore, to ensure that his harassment claim
survives summary judgment, Complainant must present enough evidence to raise a genuine issue
of material fact as to whether he was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive
that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s position would have found the conduct to be hostile
or abusive. Complainant must also raise a genuine issue of material fact as to whether conduct of
Supervisor and the District managers were motivated by unlawful considerations of his disability
and previous EEO activity.
                                               12                                       2022003106

Indicators of such discriminatory or retaliatory animus typically include discriminatory statements
or past personal treatment attributable to those responsible for the personnel action that led to the
filing of the complaint, comparative or statistical data revealing differences in treatment across
various protected-group lines, unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard
procedures without explanation or justification, or inadequately explained inconsistencies in the
evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12,
2015). Only if Complainant raises genuine issues of material fact as to both of those elements,
hostility and motive, can the question of Agency liability for discriminatory or retaliatory
harassment be brought before an AJ for a hearing.

As a preliminary matter, we find that Complainant has presented no evidence to show that he was
aggrieved by the actions alleged in claims 1 to 3. Complainant did not allege, and the record does
not reflect, that Supervisor 1A did not issue to Complainant his 30-day performance standard when
he emailed her on August 18, 2014. Notably, Complainant’s employment with the Agency was
effective July 1, 2014; and the two to three weeks delay is not uncommon.

The record shows that Complainant’s reassignment in claim 2 was in response to his request to be
temporarily moved out of the Education Department because of his relationship with Supervisor
1A. It also appears claim 40 is related to the same reassignment. In that regard, Complainant
himself asserted that he was never demoted when he was moved to the mailroom, and he kept his
same grade and pay during that time. He was later returned to the Education Department at his
request. SROI at 186-88.

Regarding claim 3, Complainant may have felt unhappy and had bruised feelings about Supervisor
1A’s statements concerning his work effort and his degrees. However, Complainant did not allege,
and there is no evidence that he suffered any tangible employment harm as a result of those
statements. See Castro v. New York City Bd. of Educ. Personnel Dir., (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 12, 1998)
("not everything that makes an employee unhappy is an actionable adverse action"). See also Diaz
v. Department of the Air Force, EEOC Request No. 05931049 (Apr. 21, 1994) (defining an
"aggrieved employee" as one who suffers a present harm or loss with respect to a term, condition,
or privilege of employment for which there is a remedy).

In claims 15, 23, 42 and 43, Complainant alleged that management took actions against him in
retaliation after he informed them he believed he was being treated differently from employees of
other races on August 12, 2016. Specifically, Complainant cited to the interview in October 2015,
for the smart watch incident that occurred in March; and asserted that the result of the internal
investigation into that incident was issued 27 days after he filed his formal EEO complaint on
September 25, 2015. However, while the events occurred in close proximity to Complainant’s
EEO filing, the record is devoid of any evidence that those management actions were motivated
by retaliatory animus. Rather, the smart watch incident was reported to the OIA (as required)
shortly after it happened; and the internal investigation was conducted based on agency policy.
Complainant presented no evidence that had he not filed his EEO complaint, that internal
investigation would not have occurred, that there would have been no interview, and that there
would have been no investigation result.
                                               13                                       2022003106

The Commission has held that an agency is not required to refrain from non-discriminatory
personnel actions it would otherwise take simply because the employee has engaged in EEO
activity. See Sotomayer v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 01A43440 (May 17, 2006)
citing Carter v. Dep’t of Education, EEOC Appeal No. 01842314 (Aug. 25, 1986).

Likewise, there is no evidence that Complainant’s fear that Supervisor 1A would retaliate against
him if he included her name in a memo he wrote about an inmate (claim 13) was grounded in fact.

In his remaining claims, Complainant alleged that he was subjected to ongoing harassment
consisting of excessive supervision/surveillance, changed duties, inaccurate performance
evaluations, and false claims of misconduct and workplace violence. Management denied that
Complainant was treated differently than his coworkers, asserting that any actions taken were
based on his behavior and conduct. Following are examples of management’s explanations for
the alleged actions.

Regarding claims 10 and 12, Supervisor 1B stated that he did not know whose decision it was to
move Complainant to the Medium, but he bid on his top three choices for working posts for the
quarter in question by using the prescribed form. According to Supervisor 1B, staff are given an
opportunity to review the tentative roster before it becomes official, and it is based on the highest
to lowest seniority of the staff. He explained that if bids are exhausted due to someone with higher
seniority taking the requested post, the roster committee tries to award the staff member a post
similar to their bids. All efforts were made to follow the Master Agreement, as well as locally
agreed upon practices. He denied that Complainant was prohibited from bidding on a shift; he
was not aware Complainant was assigned to an undesirable shift; and was not aware of
Complainant's other allegations. SROI at 480.

Regarding claim 14, Supervisor 1B did not recall Complainant’s allegations, explaining that
Complainant worked under a set of performance standards for a minimum of 90 days before
receiving a rating and Supervisor 1B incorporated Complainant's accomplishments into his log
entries, based on quarterly achievements. SROI at 482.

Regarding claims 16 and 18, Supervisor 1B stated that all staff were reminded to notify their direct
supervisor if they wanted to make a switch on their workdays. He quoted the Master Agreement,
Article 18 on the policy for this practice. SROI at 483-84.

Regarding claims 19 and 21, Coworker 2 stated that she was not a supervisor, she did not monitor
anyone other than herself, and neither Supervisor 1B nor any other supervisor could tell her to
monitor other staff.

She denied all of Complainant's allegations that Supervisor 1B had asked her to monitor him
(Complainant) and she reported back to him. Coworker 2 recalled asking Complainant for his
T&A (time and attendance) worksheet several times, which was his responsibility to turn in. She
explained that she was the "keyer" for the Education Department and Complainant's hours had to
be entered into the system timely, in order for him to be paid.
                                              14                                     2022003106

She stated that she has emails she has sent to supervisors when she was trying to obtain T&A
worksheets from staff in general, including Complainant, in order to get them paid. She did not
recall the issue with Complainant’s missing inmate pay information. Coworker 2 did not ever
recall Education having a meeting in reference to a Cease and Desist memorandum in the Warden's
Conference Room. SROI at 431.

Coworker 1 also stated that he was never asked to monitor anyone in Education, and he did not
recall a meeting with Education staff in the Warden's Conference Room where a Cease and Desist
letter was signed. He added that it might have happened with Complainant and the supervisors,
but it did not occur with the line staff. SROI at 446-47.

Supervisor 1B did not recall telling other staff to monitor Complainant. He confirmed that it was
a Warden who moved him from the Medium to the Low around March 17, 2015, because she
believed he was better suited to work at the Low. He denied that he asked anyone to monitor
Complainant and he did not recall the meeting in the Warden's Conference Room or a Cease and
Desist memorandum. SROI at 492.

Neither Coworker 2 nor Supervisor 1B recalled the incident alleged in claim 20.

Regarding claim 22, Supervisor 1B stated that all employees share responsibility for inmate
accountability; and that he provided individual guidance to Complainant about custody,
accountability, and safety of inmates assigned to his detail or area of supervision. According to
Supervisor 1B, Complainant refused to comply with the accountability practices or conform to the
institution's regulations. He did not recall undermining Complainant's classroom authority and
causing a hostile work atmosphere.

He believed Complainant created his own set of rules, which created a hostile environment for the
inmates, and Complainant did not want Supervisor 1B observing him in the classroom. Supervisor
1B believed that Complainant's communication style and actions toward the inmates continued to
cause safety and security issues in the department. Supervisor 1B described Complainant's
classroom as "noisy and out of control," causing the inmates to be disruptive and noncompliant.
He stated that he tried speaking to Complainant about his classroom several times, but
Complainant would continue to employ his own set of rules and he did not want Supervisor 1B
sending him guidance via email. Supervisor 1B added that he spoke to other staff personally as
well, when he monitored their classrooms.

Supervisor 1B confirmed that he did not support the hall passes Complainant implemented because
they caused a disruptive commotion in his classroom. Complainant was advised to follow the
rules they had in place. According to Supervisor 1B, on the date at issue, a group of inmates from
Complainant's class rushed to the front office, threatening to hurt Complainant because of the way
he had treated them. Supervisor 1B stated that he immediately went to Complainant's classroom
and saw the hall passes on a table and the inmates told him Complainant threatened to write them
up if they did not use the pass system.
                                               15                                       2022003106

Supervisor 1B described the inmates as "defiant and noncompliant" toward Complainant and
accused him of provoking them and treating them like children. He added that he defused the
situation to prevent the situation from escalating and informed the inmates they needed to respect
Complainant as their teacher. Supervisor 1B stated that he later counseled Complainant in his
office, removed the disruptive inmates and placed them in the Special Housing Unit (SHU), and
they were later transferred to other institutions. Supervisor 1B denied that he undermined
Complainant's authority or made it hard for him to work as a teacher. SROI at 489.

Regarding claim 25, Supervisor 1C explained that the main entrance door coming into the
Education Department has a metal detector by it that all inmates must pass through to enter; it is a
first line of defense to thwart contraband or weapons coming into the department. He did recall
telling Complainant he needed to stand by the door during moves. He denied knowledge of making
a comment to Complainant to the effect that he only needed to look in the mirror to find the reason
why his supervisors did not like him. He admitted that the AW sent him to the Medium to speak
with Complainant, as Supervisor 1C had a great working relationship with staff. According to
Supervisor 1C, it was easy for Complainant to feel that he was treated differently based on his race,
being the only Asian at the complex, but he just wanted Complainant to do his job. SROI at 465.

With respect to these examples, the Commission has held that, managerial decisions and personnel
actions that are disadvantageous to the employee do not automatically equate to harassment
creating a hostile work environment. See Arnold v. USPS, EEOC Appeal No. 01A24022, p 4
(October 9, 2003). Here, Complainant that management’s actions undermined his authority and
were not to his advantage because those actions did not fit in with Complainant’s goals of
achieving excellence in his performance. (See claims 11, 14 and 29). However, none of these
actions constitutes actionable harassment.

In claims 5, 8, 16, and 20, for example, Complainant alleged that management placed notes in his
personnel file. However, the record shows that these were actually log entries regarding counseling
and informal interim evaluations that were eventually not placed in Complainant’s personnel file.
We observe that the Commission has found that an email notifying an employee that the failure to
follow instructions could lead to potential discipline is not considered “materially adverse” for
purposes of a claim of retaliation. Deon L. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120162127
(Aug. 30, 2016) (finding complainant was not aggrieved when he was informed he could receive
disciplinary action if he failed to follow instructions).

Notably, management did not recall that some of Complainant’s alleged incidents occurred; and
they did not agree with Complainant’s description of those that did occur. In that regard,
Complainant disputes management’s position, asking the Commission to determine that his
supervisors were incompetent in their different positions. SROI at 76 and 209. However, even
assuming, arguendo, that all the incidents described by Complainant in his complaint are taken as
true, many are nothing more than personality conflicts and bruised feelings, which do not meet the
standard for frequent, severe or pervasive conduct. While there may have been tensions between
Complainant and management, the alleged behavior was not abusive, threatening, intimidating or
the result of ridicule based on race or reprisal.
                                               16                                       2022003106

Even if the comments of which Complainant complained were made e.g., Coworker 1’s alleged
statements that "Do you know what they say about people with a hard head? They have a soft ass"
and that Complainant needed to learn how to crawl before he walked (claim 4), or even if he was
yelled at, these incidents were not severe or pervasive, there is no evidence they were motivated
by race or reprisal, and thus, they would not constitute a viable hostile work environment claim.
See Floyd v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 012013091 (Feb. 23, 2016) (noting that
“while there is ample evidence of ongoing personality conflicts and disagreements with
management, the evidence does not indicate that management was motivated by discriminatory or
retaliatory animus with respect to any of the claims alleged”).

Importantly, Complainant did not recall anyone making explicit comments about his race or
racially insensitive comments, but he believed everyone was happy whenever he failed or was
struggling in his job. He pointed out Coworker 1’s behavior as an example of gloating in front of
him as soon as Supervisor 1A reprimanded him. He noted that people went out of their way,
especially Supervisor 1B and Supervisor 1A, to make his job harder than it needed to be and when
his coworkers saw how he was treated, they believed they could treat him the same way.

To support his harassment allegations, Complainant cited to one occasion when he and his family
went to a restaurant. According to him, when they walked in, it was "drop dead silence and
everybody was staring at us." He stated that in such an instance, “you do not need someone to
audibly say we do not like you because of who or what you are, all you need is a beating heart and
a conscious brain to realize that your presence changed people's attitudes and behavior, as a
collective group.” SROI at 200. However, Complainant’s belief that that same attitude was
fostered by his supervisors and mirrored at the prison does not prove that any of the alleged
management actions were motivated by retaliatory or discriminatory animus. Nor does
Psychologist noting in his assessment during the Workplace Violence process that there was clear
tension between Complainant and Supervisor 1A and Psychologist’s recommendation that they be
separated prove Complainant’s belief to be accurate. ROI at 67 and 150-51.

More importantly, the Commission recognizes that ordinary managerial and supervisory duties
include assuring compliance with agency policy and procedures, monitoring subordinates,
scheduling the workload, scrutinizing and evaluating performance, providing job-related advice
and counsel, taking action in the face of performance shortcomings, and to otherwise manage the
workplace. Erika H. v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC Appeal No. 0120151781 (Jun. 16, 2017). We
find that many of the allegations stated in Complainant’s complaint fall within these types of
management prerogatives, and Complainant has not shown how he was treated differently than
others who were similarly situated and outside of his protected groups.

Upon careful review of the evidence of record, as well as Complainant’s arguments on appeal, we
conclude, based on the foregoing factual and legal analysis, that summary judgment was
appropriate in this case even though AJ 2 did not provide a specific factual or legal analysis in his
decision.
                                               17                                       2022003106

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the AJ’s decision and the Agency’s final order adopting
it.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.
                                                 18                                       2022003106

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 3, 2023
Date
