              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                            Claudia D, 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Carlos Del Toro,
                                           Secretary,
                                     Department of the Navy,
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2023000122

                                     Appeal No. 2021002458

                                   Agency No. 186809300594

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021002458 (September 7, 2022).
EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a was a contractor working as an Internal
Behavioral Health Consultant/Clinical Psychologist at the Agency’s Wayne Caron Clinic,
Courthouse Bay - Naval Medical Center in Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, claiming discrimination and harassment based on race,
sex, and in reprisal for prior protected activity. Complainant alleged that she had not received her
Electronic Performance Assessment Review (ePAR), following her effective date of resignation.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2023000122

She alleged that, during orientation training, her first-line supervisor stated to her, “Don’t go
getting all emotional on me;” her first-line supervisor sent her a text with a sexually provocative
and harassing subtext stating, “As Dept head yes I got your back! Hahahaha;” her first-line
supervisor used offensive language indicating intolerance of gay service members when he said
words to the effect of, “I don't want to keep talking about it [sexual orientation]. If you’re gay,
you’re gay;” her first-line supervisor repeatedly asked her, “Wouldn’t you like to wake up to a
hunk of a body like my 225 pounds of lean muscle?” and spoke about looking at himself in the
mirror after showering, and asked her if she would like to wake up next to his body in bed; her
first-line supervisor placed his knife near her food, and after she swatted it away, he licked the
knife, stating, “I’ve had worse in my mouth;” and she was constructively discharged when she
resigned from her position, as a result of said hostile work environment.

Complainant alleged her first-line supervisor referred to an “Afro-American” male child as a
“monkey;” on diverse occasions, her first-line supervisor was physically aggressive, used
aggressive body language (“bucked” at her), would hide and jump out at Complainant in an
attempt to scare her, acted inappropriately towards Complainant and another “Afro-American”
female employee, and interacted with “Afro-American” employees differently than with white
employees; her first-line supervisor stated to her, “Everything does not have to do with race;” her
first-line supervisor asked Complainant if she thought she was needed in the clinic; her first-line
supervisor responded to concerns Complainant had emailed and spoken to him about, regarding
the disrespectful behavior of a white female employee who had put her hand in Complainant’s
face by holding an “All hands informal educational counseling;” her first-line supervisor sent a
“false and harsh” text to Complainant, Complainant’s second-line supervisor, and the Lead Chief
Petty Officer, regarding Complainant’s earlier complaints regarding the disrespectful behavior of
a white female employee towards Complainant; Complainant knocked on her first-line
supervisor’s door to discuss her concerns of discrimination and harassment, her first-line
supervisor was in a meeting and acknowledged Complainant’s knock, but a meeting did not
thereafter occur prior to Complainant leaving work for the day; Complainant’s second-line
supervisor ignored multiple requests from Complainant to meet to discuss the harassment she
alleged S1 was inflicting and was dismissive, disrespectful, argumentative, and not responsive to
Complainant’s concerns; Complainant’s first-line supervisor gave her a written informal Record
of Counseling, after having already given her a verbal counseling for the same incident; her first-
line supervisor placed his hand directly in front of Complainant’s face for an extended period of
time and mocked her when she complained about the behavior of a white female, who had
previously put her hand in Complainant’s face; her first-line supervisor sent her "menacing and
harassing" text messages; while Complainant engaged in a text message exchange with her first
and second-line supervisors, responded to a text from her first-line supervisor by asserting it was
harassing, emotional, and retaliatory and, in response, her second-line supervisor texted, “This
conversation stops now, CDR sends” but, her second-line supervisor thereafter took no action to
address her first-line supervisor’s earlier alleged harassing, emotional, and retaliatory text; and
Complainant was constructively discharged, when she resigned from her position, as a result of
said hostile work environment.
                                               3                                    2023000122

After an investigation, Complainant requested a final Agency decision. In accordance with that
request, the Agency issued a final decision concluding the evidence of record did not establish
discrimination. Complainant appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2019002516, the Commission found the available evidence was
insufficient regarding the Agency’s delay in issuing Complainant’s ePAR and remanded the
complaint for a supplemental investigation and a new final decision on all the claims.

Following the supplemental investigation, the Agency issued a final decision concluding the
evidence of record did not establish any discrimination. Complainant appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2021002458, the Commission affirmed the Agency’s final decision finding
no discrimination.

In the instant request for reconsideration, we have carefully reviewed Complainant’s arguments
and determine that the matters either were raised or could have been raised below. We note that
during the original appeal from the Agency’s final order, Complainant presented extensive
arguments, some of which have been replicated in the instant request. We emphasize that a
request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A
(Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20,
2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021002458 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.
                                                4                                    2023000122

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 27, 2023
Date
