             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                            Jon M., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                      Christine Wormuth,
                                           Secretary,
                                    Department of the Army,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022003920

                            Agency No. ARDETRICK22APR02225

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission) from the Agency's final decision dated June 16, 2022, dismissing a formal
complaint alleging unlawful employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a Patent Attorney at the Agency’s Fort
Detrick in Maryland through a contract which an entity identified as Venesco entered with the
Agency.

On June 1, 2022, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency subjected him
to discrimination based on his race (African American) and sex (male). In its final decision dated
June 16, 2022, the Agency determined that the formal complaint was comprised of the following
claim: On April 4, 2022, management of Venesco terminated his contract as a Patent Attorney
because of what he believed to be false allegations made by a named Patent Attorney.

The Agency dismissed the formal complaint for failure to state a claim. The Agency reasoned
that Complainant was neither a federal employee nor an applicant for federal employment.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and on the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022003920

In addition, the Agency reasoned that it lacked sufficient control over Complainant’s
employment to be considered a joint employer for EEO purposes. 2

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant asserts that the Agency’s dismissal is
improper and that the Agency should be deemed a joint employer for EEO purposes.
Complainant states that only Agency personnel assigned him work and set his work schedule.
Complainant also states that the contractor did not provide daily supervision of him and only
Agency legal personnel were allowed to supervise and evaluate his projects. Complainant
asserts that an Agency Patent Attorney made false allegations that he disclosed confidential
information. Complainant states that “shortly thereafter, without investigation or the opportunity
to defend himself…Complainant was terminated. “

In response, the Agency requests that we affirm its final decision dismissing his complaint. The
Agency states that Venesco, without consultation from the Agency, terminated Complainant.
The Agency states that Venesco placed Complainant on a thirty-day probation and terminated
Complainant after conducting an investigation.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The issue here is whether the Agency properly dismissed Complainant’s complaint for failure to
state a claim on the basis that Complainant was not its employee. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §
1614.103(a) provides that complaints of discrimination shall be processed in accordance with
Part 1614 of the EEOC Regulations. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(c) provides that
within covered department, agencies, units, Part 1614 applies to all employees and applicants for
employment.

In Serita B. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150846 (Nov. 10, 2016), the
Commission reaffirmed its longstanding position on “joint employers” and noted that it is found
in numerous sources. See, e.g. EEOC Compliance Manual Section 2, “Threshold Issues,”
Section 2-III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) (May 1, 2000) (Compliance Manual); EEOC Enforcement
Guidance: Application of EEO Laws to Contingent Workers Placed by Temporary Employment
Agencies and Other Staffing Firms (Dec. 3, 1997) (Enforcement Guidance), “Coverage Issues,”
Question 2; Ma v. Dept of Health and Human Services, EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 &


2
  The record contains an email from the Agency EEO Manager to an Agency Labor Law
Attorney in the Office of the Staff Judge Advocate (which appears to be outside the Agency’s
EEO Office) dated June 8, 2022. Therein, the EEO Manager asserts that she is attaching a
decision letter with respect to this matter on which she needs a “legal sufficiency review done
on” and that she believes the individual is considered a de facto employee. In response, the
record contains an email form the Agency’s Labor Law Attorney dated June 14, 2020. Therein,
the Agency Labor Law Attorney asserts “I did a semi edit to the acceptance letter to make it a
denial…” We remind the Agency of its obligation to maintain a firewall between its EEO
functions and the Agency’s defensive function. See Management Directive 110 for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614, Ch. 1, (IV)(D) (rev. Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                3                                     2022003920

01962390 (May 29, 1998). We reiterate the analysis set forth in those decisions and guidance
documents in this decision.

Agencies often conclude that an individual is not an employee based solely on the fact that the
individual performs work pursuant to a contract between the federal government and an outside
organization and the outside organization, not the federal government controls the pay and
benefits of that individual. See e.g. Helen G. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150262
(Feb. 11, 2016); Nicki v. B. v. Dep’t of Educ., EEOC Appeal No. 0120151697 (Feb. 9, 2016).
These elements are, however, just two of the factors relevant to joint employment under the
Commission’s long-standing position and it is not at all surprising that they would be present
when an individual working under a federal contract for a federal agency raises a complaint of
discrimination.

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each exercise sufficient control
of an individual to qualify as the worker’s employer. Compliance Manual, Section 2-
III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). To determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise sufficient control,
EEOC considers factors derived from common law principles of agency. See Enforcement
Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2. EEOC considers, inter alia, the Agency’s right to
control when, where, and how the worker performs the job; the right to assign additional projects
to the worker; whether the work is performed on Agency premises; whether the Agency provides
the tools, material, and equipment to perform the job; the duration of the relationship between
the Agency and the worker; whether the Agency controls the worker’s schedule; and whether the
Agency can discharge the worker. EEOC Compliance Manual, Section 2 -III(A)(1) (citing
Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318, 323-24 (1992)); EEOC v. Skanska USA
Bldg., Inc., 550 F. App’x 253, 256 (6th Cir. 2013) (“Entities are joint employers if they ‘share or
co-determine those matters governing essential terms and conditions of employment’”) (quoting
Carrier Corp. v. NLRB, 768 F.2d 778, 781 (6th Cir. 1985); see also Ma EEOC Appeal Nos.
01962389 & 01962390.

The language of the contract between the Agency and the staffing firm is not dispositive as to
whether a joint employment situation exists. In determining a worker's status, EEOC looks to
what actually occurs in the workplace, even if it contradicts the language in the contract between
the staffing firm and the agency. Baker v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 01A45313
(Mar. 16, 2006) (while contract between staffing firm and agency provided that contract
personnel were employees of staffing firm under its administrative supervision and control,
agency actually retained supervisory authority over the contract workers).

On the factor of the right to control when, where, and how the worker performs the job and to
assign additional projects, complete agency control is not required. Rather, the control may be
partial or joint and still point to joint employment. Shorter v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120131148 (June 11, 2013) (where both staffing firm and agency made
assignments, this pointed to joint employment); Complainant v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120143162 (May 20, 2015), request for reconsideration denied, EEOC Request No.
0520150430 (Mar. 11, 2016) (where staffing firm wrote and issued complainant's appraisal with
                                                4                                     2022003920

input from agency, this pointed toward joint employment). Likewise, where both the agency and
staffing firm provided tools, material, and equipment to perform the job, this pointed to joint
employment. Elkin v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120122211(Nov. 8, 2012).
Similarly, where a staffing firm terminates a worker after an agency communicates it no longer
wants the worker's services, this supports a finding that the agency has joint or de facto power to
discharge the worker. See, e.g., Complainants v. Dep't of Justice, EEOC Appeal Nos.
0120141963 & 0120141762 (Jan. 28, 2015); see also Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550 Fed. App'x
at 254, 256 (where defendant removed staffing firm's workers from job site without challenge
from staffing firm, and after such removals staffing firm generally fired worker, this pointed to
joint employment); Butler v. Drive Auto. Indus. of America, Inc., 793 F.3d 404, 414-15 (4th Cir.
2015). The EEOC considers an entity's right to control the terms and conditions of employment,
whether or not it exercises that right, as relevant to joint employer status. Enforcement Guidance,
“Coverage Issues,” at Question 2, Example 5 (where an entity reserves the right to direct the
means and manner of an individual's work, but does not generally exercise that right, the entity
may still be found to be a joint employer).

Complainant alleges that he was terminated due to false allegations made by an Agency Patent
Law Attorney and that these allegations were reported to Venesco. 3 Thus, the circumstances
surrounding Complainant’s termination are significant as to whether the Agency is a joint
employer for EEO purposes.

The record reflects that the EEO Counselor interviewed the Agency Patent Attorney that
Complainant alleges made false allegations against him. According to the EEO Counselor’s
Report, the Agency Patent Attorney asserted that she did not direct Venesco to terminate
Complainant. The Agency attorney asserted that she spoke with a Venesco representative that
she had concerns that Complainant had disclosed certain information to a non-government
attorney and that she asked the Venesco representative to find out the details. The Agency
attorney asserts that she found out later from an Agency paralegal that Venesco terminated
Complainant’s employment.

The record is not sufficiently developed to make a determination as to whether the Agency is a
joint employer for the purpose of using the 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 complaint process. The record is
devoid of evidence that the Agency interviewed or even tried to interview relevant officials with
Venesco. In a document entitled “Requests for Information and Documents”, Complainant states
that “[a named Agency Patent Attorney] told Venesco and the military that [he] had spoken
about substantive confidential information with a non-government attorney. While the Agency in
its opposition brief asserts that Venesco conducted an investigation, prior to terminating him
(Agency Brief at 5), Complainant appears to assert that than an investigation was not started until
after he received notice of his termination.



3
  In an Exit Interview form from Venesco dated April 5, 2022, Complainant stated that his reason
for leaving was “false accusation of confidentiality [breach] by [a named Agency Patent
Attorney]”.
                                                  5                                     2022003920

Specifically, Complainant stated that “[a]fter I received the termination email, I received a
questionnaire from Venesco…” 4 Complainant asserted that the Agency Patent Attorney had full
knowledge he would be fired based on her allegations. We further note that while the EEO
Counselor’s Report contains a summary of the testimony of the Agency Patent Attorney, the
record does not contain an affidavit from this individual. 5 In addition, the record does not
contain an affidavit from Complainant surrounding the circumstances of his termination.

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision dismissing Complainant’s complaint and
we REMAND this matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation in accordance with the
ORDER below.

                                              ORDER

Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency is ORDERED
to take the following actions:

       1.    Conduct a supplemental investigation to obtain evidence consistent with this decision
            and relevant in assessing whether the Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes.
            The evidentiary record shall include, but is not limited to, the following matters: an
            affidavit from the Agency Patent Attorney referenced in the EEO Counselor’s Report.
            The affidavit shall address the circumstances leading up to Complainant’s removal
            and whether she suggested or requested that Venesco take any action with respect to
            Complainant prior to his termination. The Agency shall also obtain affidavits from
            any other Agency officials that appear to have knowledge of the circumstances
            surrounding Complainant’s termination.

       2.    The Agency shall obtain an affidavit from Complainant addressing the circumstances
            surrounding his termination. The affidavit shall address when Complainant received
            notice of his termination and when an investigation was conducted into the
            allegations made against him (i.e. prior to or after receiving notice of his termination).

       3. The Agency shall also obtain an affidavit from relevant officials from Venesco
          addressing, in detail, the circumstances surrounding Complainant’s termination and
          whether Agency officials requested Venesco to take any action prior to
          Complainant’s termination. The affidavits shall also address 1) when Complainant
          was terminated and 2) if Venesco conducted an investigation regarding the
          allegations made against Complainant and if so, when did the investigation occur



4
 The record contains an email from Complainant to an official at Venesco dated March 18, 2022
4:50 p.m. with the subject “RE: [Complainant] Follow up Questions.”
5
  We acknowledge that the record contains a declaration under penalty of perjury from a
Paralegal Specialist providing information pertaining to Venesco’s contract with the Agency.
                                                6                                     2022003920

            (prior to or after Complainant’s termination). The supplemental investigation shall
            also include any documentation related to Complainant’s termination.

       4.    The Agency shall either issue a new final decision either dismissing the formal
            complaint, with an appropriate analysis of relevant facts with appeal rights to the
            Commission, or a letter accepting Complainant’s complaint for investigation.

       5. A copy of the supplemental investigation and new dismissal letter or letter of
          acceptance shall be provided as set forth below in the section entitled
          “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               7                                    2022003920

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 8                                      2022003920

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 2, 2022
Date
