             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Sharon D., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                   Denis R. McDonough,
                                         Secretary,
                               Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2022001842

                             Agency No. 200H-0693-2020106712

                                         DECISION

On February 18, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 19, 2022, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Acting Chief of
Psychology, GS-0180-14, at the Agency’s VA Medical Center in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania.

On December 4, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her and subjected her to a hostile work environment in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:

       1. On September 28, 2020, Complainant became aware that the position for which she
          had been selected, Acting Chief of Psychology Not to Exceed January 17, 2021, was
          being posted before Complainant’s term appointment terminated;



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2022001842

       2. In September 2020, subsequent to Complainant reporting her immediate supervisor’s
          (S1) increasingly hostile behavior toward Complainant to the Chief of Staff, the Chief
          of Staff made the decision to send Complainant home to telework for two weeks,
          instead of having S1 detailed to another part of the facility and S1 remained in her
          office next door to Complainant’s office;
       3. On unspecified dates, S1 made disparaging comments regarding Complainant’s attire;
       4. On an unspecified date, Complainant became aware that S1 informed the
          Administrative Officer, prior to posting the announcement, that she considered
          placing another psychologist in Complainant’s current position; and
       5. On an unspecified date, Complainant was informed that, on September 18, 2020, the
          day Complainant was sent home to telework, S1 demanded that Complainant’s time
          in the Agency’s time and attendance system (VATAS) be “pulled” as evidence to use
          against Complainant. 2

Claim 1 – Posting of the Position Before the Expiration of the Term Appointment

Complainant had been serving as the Acting Chief, Psychology since January 2020. She had
been placed in the position as a term appointment that was scheduled to expire on January 17,
2021. In September 2020, Complainant told her second level supervisor (S2) about hostility that
she believed she was receiving from S1. The record shows that, on September 17, 2020,
Complainant sent S2 an email that offered to tender her resignation from her position because of
the harsh treatment. Complainant also advised S2 that she believed the hostility had escalated,
and that S1 had berated her and many others.

After Complainant complained to S2, he met with Complainant. S2 informed Complainant that
he would relay her concerns to the Medical Center Director and request that an investigation be
initiated. In addition, S2 removed S1 from Complainant’s chain of command and instructed
Complainant to directly report to him. Complainant believed that S1 then retaliated against her.
Complainant had assumed that she would be appointed permanently to the position non-
competitively. However, S1 requested that the position be posted. Complainant acknowledged
that S1 informed her that she wanted to post the position so that others, outside of the Agency as
well as those within the Agency, would be able to compete for the position. S2 told Complainant
that he did not see the posting of the position as a reflection on her performance. He stated that it
was common practice to post a position before the end of a detail.

There is no evidence that Complainant was ever demoted. In February 2021, Complainant began
serving as the GS-14 Acting Associate Chief of Staff.




2
  The Agency dismissed several additional claims for raising the same claims as alleged in a
previously withdrawn complaint. Complainant raised no challenges to the dismissal of these
claims and the Commission can find no basis to disturb the Agency’s dismissal decision.
                                                    3                                      2022001842

Claim 2 – Complainant was Told to Telework

S2 stated that after talking with Complainant about her allegations against S1, he asked her
preference for office space and working arrangements that would suit her best. Pursuant to
Complainant’s request, S2 agreed that Complainant would be permitted to telework for two
weeks to allow her to get the appropriate equipment and forms signed for telework which he
facilitated. S2 noted that the agreement was not terminated after two weeks. Complainant later
requested that she be permitted to continue to telework or work away from the clinic when S1
was onsite. S2 approved the arrangement that Complainant requested. S1 later retired. 3 S2
denied retaliating against Complainant.

Claims 3 and 4 – Negative Comments

Complainant stated that she had previously filed a sexual harassment complaint against a former
co-worker. Complainant claimed that prior to making the complaint, S1 had never made any
comments about her attire. After she filed the complaint, Complainant averred that S1 told
Complainant that she felt that Complainant’s attire was sometimes too revealing and told her that
she did not want Complainant to wear a certain outfit anymore. She also made negative
comments regarding Complainant’s performance, suggesting that Complainant was “doing
nothing.” Complainant averred that she had been told that S1 informed the Administrative
Officer, prior to posting the announcement that she was considering placing another psychologist
in the position to which Complainant had been detailed. The Administrative Officer denied that
S1 told him she was considering someone else. The record shows that Complainant received an
“Outstanding” rating from S1 on her most recent performance evaluation.

Complainant stated there were two witnesses to the alleged harassment. One witness stated that
he never witnessed harassment, but he averred that S1 showed Complainant a lack of respect and
overlooked her in meetings at times. Both witnesses deny that they saw S1 retaliate against
Complainant.

Claim 5 – Supervisor Asked to See Complainant’s Time and Attendance Record

The Timekeeper confirmed that S1 asked her to pull Complainant’s leave report. The
Timekeeper added that, the following day, S1 asked her to pull the leave report for all of the
employees. The Timekeeper did not believe that this was done to retaliate against Complainant.
There is no evidence of any adverse action being taken against Complainant.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).


3
    As a result of her retirement, S1 did not participate in the investigation of this complaint.
                                                 4                                      2022001842

In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that Agency
management subjected her to reprisal as alleged. This appeal followed.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Retaliatory Hostile Work Environment

As a general matter, the statutory anti-retaliation provisions prohibit any adverse treatment that is
sufficient to dissuade a “reasonable person” from making or supporting a charge of
discrimination. See Burlington Northern & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006);
EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, §
II(B)(3) & n. 137 (Aug. 25, 2016). Although petty slights and trivial annoyances are not
actionable, adverse actions or threats to take adverse actions such as reprimands, negative
evaluations, and harassment are actionable. Id. We note that the threshold for establishing
retaliatory harassment is different than for discriminatory hostile work environment. Retaliatory
harassing conduct can be challenged under the Burlington Northern standard even if it is not
severe or pervasive enough to alter the terms and conditions of employment. “If the conduct
would be sufficiently material to deter protected activity in the given context, even if it were
insufficiently severe or pervasive to create a hostile work environment, there would be actionable
retaliation.” EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, No. 915.004, Sect.
II.B, e.g. 17.

In the instant matter, Complainant established that her former supervisor berated her and other
employees, and that she was subjected to an unpleasant environment. However, we find that
Complainant has not provided sufficient evidence to indicate that this behavior was retaliatory,
as opposed to evidence of a bad interpersonal relationship between the S1 and Complainant. The
Commission has repeatedly stated that such personality clashes and other common workplace
grievances “while sometimes unpleasant, do not constitute harassment, even if done in a
confrontational manner.” Felton M. v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120171203 (June 23,
2017). For example, regarding claims (1) and (4), the record supports that Complainant’s detail
assignment in the acting position was ending and management wanted to open the position to
internal and external candidates as was routine practice.
                                               5                                    2022001842

With respect to claims (2) and (3), once Complainant reported her allegations regarding S1, S2
removed Complainant from S1’s chain of command; initiated an investigation; and allowed
Complainant to telework and/or work in an empty office when S1 was onsite pursuant to her
choice. Finally, with regard to claim (5), the Timekeeper confirmed that S1 asked for
Complainant’s leave report, but that she also asked for the leave report for each employee in her
service and that the Timekeeper did not believe that S1 acted with retaliatory animus.

As Complainant did not request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's final credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the
Commission can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. The
Commission finds no persuasive evidence that Complainant's prior protected EEO activity was a
factor in any of the Agency's actions. Moreover, to the extent Complainant claims that she was
subjected to disparate treatment, the Commission finds that Complainant has not proffered any
evidence demonstrating that the Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for reprisal.
Accordingly, we find that Complainant has not shown that she was subjected to reprisal or a
hostile work environment.

                                        CONCLUSION

For these reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s Final Decision.



                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)



The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:


       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition.
                                                6                                     2022001842

See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)


You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.



                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
                                                 7                                      2022001842

You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney
directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please
read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                          Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 19, 2023
Date
