             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Violet F., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022004486

                                Hearing No. 540-2020-00039X

                              Agency No. 200P-0501-2019102589

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 21, 2022 final order
concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint claiming employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
(ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a Chaplain at the Agency’s Albuquerque VA
Medical Center in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

On April 25, 2019, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint claiming the Agency subjected
her to a hostile work environment based on her sex (female), disability (post-traumatic stress
disorder/PTSD), 2 and age (YOB: 1952) when as evidenced by the following events:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022004486

           a. on or about October 2018, a coworker said to Complainant when she wore jeans
              to work, “it looks like you are posting an ad for Luby’s Restaurant Buffet saying
              come eat all you can eat;”

           b. on or about mid-January 2019, the same coworker said to Complainant as they
              were standing by the paper shredder, “see when you push it in and it slips out you
              have to push it back in. See, it slipped out, and I pushed it back in,” or words to
              that effect; and

           c. on March 11, 2019, Complainant was issued a written counseling.

In brief, the evidence developed during the Agency’s investigation into her complaint, reflects
that Complainant said that in October 2018, she asked her co-worker (“CW1”) (African
American male, age 61), also a chaplain, what he thought about her jeans. She alleges that CW1
responded by saying, “it looks like you are posting an ad for Luby’s Restaurant Buffet saying
come eat all you can eat.” CW1 denied making this comment. Instead, CW1 said that when
Complainant asked him what he thought of her jeans and he responded that they were okay, but
he did not think they were appropriate for the office. Complainant asked what he meant by that
remark and he recalls telling her that his Pastor used to say, “If you don’t want folks looking at
your house, then take the For Sale sign down.” Complainant did not report any alleged comment
by CW1 to management at the time.

About three months later, in January 2019, Complainant alleged CW1 made another
inappropriate comment at the paper shredder which she interpreted as sexual in nature.
Complainant alleges that CW1 was standing next to her while shredding paper and made the
following comment: “see when you push it in and it slips out you have to push it back in. See, it
slipped out, and I pushed it back in.” CW1 stated he had no memory of this incident.

Complainant reported the shredder incident to the Chief of Chaplain Services (male), who was
her immediate supervisor. At that time, she also told him about the alleged jeans comment. The
supervisor initiated an investigation into the matter and immediately moved CW1 into a different
work area away from Complainant.

During the management inquiry into Complainant’s complaint about CW1, Complainant’s
supervisor said she asked him about CW1’s sexual orientation and HIV status, which he judged
to be an inappropriate question. As a result, on March 11, 2019, Complainant was issued a
written counseling by her supervisor. Complainant acknowledges she did engage in the conduct
she was charged with in the written counseling – that she asked about her supervisor about
CW1’s HIV status.


2
  Complainant testified that she was diagnosed with PTSD in 1987 in response to military sexual
trauma. Complainant explained that as a result of her PTSD, she experienced depression,
anxiety, and stress.
                                                3                                     2022004486

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant a copy of the report
of investigation (ROI) and notice of right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative
Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.

However, on July 15, 2022, the AJ issued a decision by summary judgment in favor of the
Agency. Based on the evidence developed during the EEO investigation and by adopting in its
entirety and incorporating by reference the Agency’s motion for summary judgment, 3 the AJ
concluded that Complainant failed to demonstrate there were genuine issues of material fact
requiring a hearing. As summarily adopted from the Agency’s motion, the AJ determined that
Complainant failed to demonstrate that harassment claims were sufficiently severe or pervasive
to constitute a hostile work environment in violation of Title VII or the Rehabilitation Act.
Regarding the written counseling, the AJ affirmed, as summarily adopted from the Agency’s
motion, that the Agency articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for issuing
Complainant the March 11, 2019 written counseling which Complainant did not prove was a
pretext for discrimination.

On July 21, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision adopting the AJ’s finding of no
discrimination.

The instant appeal followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding
that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision
without a hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed.
R. Civ. P. 56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge
determines no genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards.
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment
motion, the judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to
weighing the evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the
non-moving party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s
favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for
the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip.
Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the
outcome of a case.


3
  The record reflects that Complainant filed an April 15, 2021 response in opposition to the
Agency’s motion. However, the AJ determined that contrary to Complainant’s assertion, the
Agency’s motion was not premature, as it was filed after the discovery period ended on March 1,
2021. The record further reflects that Complainant also filed a motion for default judgment on
February 3, 2022, which the AJ denied as moot and inadvertently identified in the decision as
occurring on March 3, 2022.
                                                4                                    2022004486

To successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a complainant must identify, with
specificity, facts in dispute either within the record or by producing further supporting evidence
and must further establish that such facts are material under applicable law. Here, Complainant
has failed to point with any specificity to particular evidence in the investigative file or other
evidence of record that indicates such a dispute. Here, we find no error on the part of the AJ in
concluding that, even construing any inferences raised by the undisputed facts in favor of
Complainant, a reasonable fact-finder could not find in her favor.

To prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to conduct
that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s position
would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Thus, not all claims of harassment
violate the employment discrimination statutes. The Supreme Court in Faragher v. City of Boca
Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 788 (1998), concluded that “simple teasing, offhand comments, and
isolated incidents (unless extremely serious) will not amount to discriminatory changes in the
‘terms and conditions of employment’”. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was
taken because of a protected basis – in this case, her sex, disability or age. Only if Complainant
establishes both of those elements – hostility and motive – will the question of Agency liability
present itself. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris v. Forklift
Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also, Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift
Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (March 8, 1994).

Here, we conclude the evidence of record supports the AJ’s determination that the incidents of
alleged harassment identified by Complainant, even if assumed to be true and considered
together, are insufficient to establish the severity or pervasiveness necessary to amount to a
violation of the employment discrimination laws. Moreover, the evidence also supports the AJ’s
conclusion that because management took prompt and immediate action to address
Complainant’s harassment allegations involving CW1, there was no basis for imputing liability
to the employer. In the case of co-worker harassment, as here, an agency is responsible for acts
of harassment in the workplace where the agency (or its agents) knew or should have known of
the conduct, unless it can show that it took immediate and appropriate corrective action.
Humphrey v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01965238 (Oct. 16, 1998); 29 C.F.R.
§ 1604.11.

Here, the record indicates that Complainant notified her supervisor in January 2019 that CW1
was creating a hostile work environment, and the supervisor immediately referred the matter for
an internal investigation. While the investigation was pending, the supervisor relocated CW1’s
workstation to another area away from Complainant. The results of the internal investigation did
not support evidence of a hostile work environment as there was no other corroborating
evidence, aside from Complainant’s testimony, regarding the shredder incident.              The
investigation did find revealed that CW1 made an inappropriate comment regarding
Complainant’s jeans (the comment he admitted to making) and Complainant engaged in
inappropriate behavior when she inquired about CW1’s sexual orientation and HIV status with
the Chief Chaplain.
                                               5                                    2022004486

As a result, written counseling was recommended for both Complainant and CW1, which was
done. Complainant admitted that she asked her supervisor about CW1’s sexual orientation and
HIV status. The record supports the finding that management officials issued Complainant a
written counseling based on her inappropriate questions and not on her sex, age, or disability.

As a final matter, we note that on appeal, Complainant argues that on February 3, 2022, she had
requested a final agency decision which the AJ ignored. Complainant further asserted that a
default judgment was warranted due to the Agency’s failure to follow the AJ’s rules, partially
those concerning discovery. We find that the AJ had previously addressed Complainant’s claim
that the Agency’s motion for summary judgment was premature. The record confirms that the
Agency’s motion was issued after discovery concluded and we find no basis to disturb the AJ’s
determination. Additionally, our review of Complainant’s February 3, 2022 motion reflects that
Complainant requested default judgment, and an award of punitive and compensatory damages.
However, nowhere in the February 3, 2022 motion did Complainant indicate that she wanted to
withdraw her hearing request and have the Agency issue a final decision on the matter.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final order adoption the AJ’s decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                                6                                     2022004486

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  7                                     2022004486

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 3, 2022
Date
