             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Tyree B., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of Defense
                          (Department of Defense Education Activity),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022003306

                                Hearing No. 570-2019-01521X

                                  Agency No. EU-FY18-035

                                          DECISION

Following its May 10, 2022, final order, the Agency filed a timely appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a). On appeal, the Agency requests that the Commission affirm its rejection of an
EEOC Administrative Judge's (AJ) finding of discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. The Agency also requests
that the Commission affirm its rejection of the AJ’s decision. Specifically, the Agency contends
that the AJ erred in granting summary judgment finding discrimination on some of
Complainant’s claims and also contends that the AJ’s award of compensatory damages was
excessive.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Transportation
Assistant, GS-07, at the Agency’s DoDEA Europe East District, the Stuttgart school bus office in
Stuttgart, Germany.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022003306

On May 18, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the bases of his race (African American), sex (male), age (YOB: 1970), and
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1.      On or about December 17, 2017, Complainant learned that his job application had
               not been properly addressed when he was not certified for or selected for
               Transportation Operations Specialist, GS-2150-09, position at the District
               Logistics office, Europe East.
       2.      Since April 2013, Complainant has been forced to perform GS-09 duties while he
               was paid as a GS-07.
       3.      Since October 2017, the Chief of Logistics (Chief) and the East District
               Transportation Superintendent (Superintendent) and the Assistant Principal,
               Stuttgart High School (Assistant Principal), have made unspecified ongoing
               harassing comments to him and about him.
       4.      On unspecified dates, Complainant was denied participation in the Priority
               Placement Program.
       5.      Complainant was retaliated against when the Chief and the Superintendent did not
               select him for the position of Transportation Operations Specialist, GS-2150-09,
               when the incumbent resigned on July 6, 2018.
       6.      Complainant was retaliated against when on September 14, 2018, the
               Superintendent issued Complainant a Fully Successful Performance Rating.
       7.      From September 2018 to present, Complainant has been harassed by a former Co-
               Worker, the Chief, and the Superintendent in various ways, including but not
               limited to: receiving no support or communication from the Chief; the Chief and
               the Superintendent failed to assist Complainant with his office move; the
               Superintendent accused Complainant of lying when some of Complainant’s
               computer systems were inoperable; and the Superintendent told someone that if
               Complainant wanted to get promoted he needed to go back to the States.
       8.      On October 18, 2018, Complainant was not selected by the Chief for the position
               of      Transportation     Specialist,     GS-2150-09,     Request       Number
               18AUG37XHE125401075 1.
       9.      On December 7, 2018, Complainant’s Overtime Compensation request for hours
               worked was denied by the Superintendent. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely
requested a hearing. Both parties submitted motions for summary judgment.




2
  We note that Complainant’s amended complaint erroneously identified the Chief as the
selecting official in claim 8 but the evidence in the record indicates that the Superintendent was
the selecting official in all the non-selection claims, including claim 8.
                                                 3                                     2022003306

On February 3, 2022, the AJ issued a decision by summary judgment. The AJ initially noted that
prior to Complainant initiating EEO counselor contact for the instant complaint on January 22,
2018, Complainant’s prior EEO activity consisted of serving as a witness in the Assistant
Principal’s EEO case sometime in 2014 or 2015. The AJ found that Complainant failed to
establish a prima facie case of reprisal with respect to claims 1-3. See Decision on Liability at 7.
The AJ further found that Complainant offered no evidence beyond his bare assertions to
indicate any discriminatory animus for any of his protected bases for claims 2, 4, and 9. See
Decision on Liability at 7-9. The AJ concluded that there was no evidence of discriminatory
animus for the alleged incidents of harassment in claim 7 and that moreover, none of the alleged
incidents constituted action that was reasonably likely to deter a reasonable person from
engaging in protected activity and therefore, Complainant did not establish that he was subjected
to retaliatory harassment. See Decision on Liability at 9-10.

With respect to the non-selections in claims 1, 5, and 8, the AJ found that the record was
strikingly insufficient, with no information either on who was actually selected for which
position or any information on their respective qualifications compared to Complainant’s. See
Decision on Liability at 11. The AJ further noted that Complainant established a prima facie
case of reprisal with respect to the non-selections that occurred after February 28, 2018 (claims 5
and 8), when the Superintendent who was the Selecting Official was informed of Complainant’s
current complaint and that the Agency failed to set forth legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons
for the non-selections. See Decision on Liability at 11-13. The AJ further went on to find that
the Agency failed to provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s
performance rating in claim 6. See Decision on Liability at 14. The AJ therefore issued
summary judgment in the Agency’s favor on claims 2, 3, 4, and 7 and summary judgment in
Complainant’s favor with respect to claims 1, 5, 6, and 8.

Thereafter, on April 5, 2022, the AJ issued a decision addressing damages, awarding
Complainant back pay for the difference in salary between the GS-07, step 1, and the GS-09,
step 1 rates from April 1, 2018, to one day prior to Complainant’s promotion to the GS-09 level
in 2020. The AJ denied Complainant’s request for pecuniary damages for his 2020 move from
Germany to the United States because she found that the move was not related to Complainant’s
being denied the GS-09 position. The AJ awarded non-pecuniary, compensatory damages in the
amount of $20,000, and costs in the amount of $3,104.40. The Agency subsequently issued a
final order rejecting the AJ’s finding that Complainant proved that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

The Agency appeals the AJ’s Decision with respect to the AJ’s ruling in Complainant’s favor on
claims 1, 5, 6, and 8, and the AJ’s award of non-pecuniary, compensatory damages. 3


3
  Neither Complainant nor the Agency challenges the AJ’s findings in the Agency’s favor on
claims 2, 3, 4, and 7. We therefore exercise our discretion to address only those issues which are
raised on appeal and will not address the merits of the AJ’s findings on claims 2, 3, 4, and 7. See
                                                4                                     2022003306

The Agency first contends that the AJ erred by granting summary judgment when she herself
found that the record had inconsistent statements and lacked critical information on the non-
selection claims. On the merits, the Agency also challenges the AJ’s finding that the Agency did
not articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the non-selections and for Complainant’s
performance rating, arguing that the non-selections were due to the Agency’s policy restricting
civilian employment in foreign areas to five years and Complainant’s having already served
longer than five years in Germany at the relevant time and because Complainant’s performance
rating system was changed between the ratings in fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2018. The
Agency also argues that the AJ’s award of compensatory damages was excessive and should be
reduced.

Complainant filed a response brief which restates his petition for damages before the AJ.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS


The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding
that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision
without a hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed.
R. Civ. P. 56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge
determines no genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards.
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment
motion, the judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to
weighing the evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the
non-moving party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s
favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for
the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip.
Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the
outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
In this case, we note that both the Agency and Complainant filed motions for summary judgment
and therefore did not dispute before the AJ that summary judgment was appropriate. On appeal,
however, the Agency contends that the AJ erred in granting summary judgment because the AJ
also found in her Decision on Lability that the record was strikingly deficient in evidence as to
the non-selections, noting specifically that she could not determine “who was selected for which
position,” and there was also very little, if any, information about the relative qualifications of
applicants or the applicants’ application materials.



EEOC Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (MD-110), at Ch. 9, §1V.A. (Nov. 9,
1999); see also Sandifer v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120123349 (Jan. 18, 2013).
                                                 5                                     2022003306

While we agree with the AJ that the record is lacking in much of the evidence pertaining to the
non-selections, we do not find that the AJ erred in granting summary judgment in this case
because the missing evidence does not indicate a dispute of material fact which requires the
weighing of credibility and would preclude the issuance of summary judgment. Rather, we
emphasize that all of the missing evidence consists of documentation which was in the Agency’s
control and the Agency therefore is responsible for its failure to produce the relevant
documentation, either during the investigation itself or at any point during discovery or again
when the Agency filed its motion for summary judgment. The Agency does not provide any
explanation for its failure to produce the relevant information. 4 We also note that the Agency
itself filed a motion for summary judgment with the AJ. While we acknowledge that the record is
incomplete in some respects, we do not find that the incomplete record was attributable to the
Complainant or the AJ and there is insufficient indication that there are genuine disputes of
material fact or issues which require a credibility finding such that summary judgment would be
precluded. See Tanya D. v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 2022002544 (Nov. 21, 2022).
We therefore find that the AJ’s issuance of summary judgment was proper.

Disparate Treatment

Generally, claims of disparate treatment are examined under the analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Hochstadt v. Worcester Found. for
Experimental Biology, Inc., 425 F. Supp. 318, 324 (D. Mass.), aff’d, 545 F.2d 222 (1st Cir.
1976). For Complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. Furnco Constr.
Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978); McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13. Once
Complainant has established a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine,
450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). If the Agency is successful, the burden reverts back to Complainant
to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s reason(s) for its action was
a pretext for discrimination. Specifically, with respect to reprisal, a complainant may establish a
prima facie case of reprisal by showing that: (1) the complainant engaged in protected activity;
(2) the agency was aware of the protected activity; (3) subsequently, complainant was subjected
to adverse treatment by the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected activity and the
adverse treatment.




4
  To the extent the Agency argues that the AJ appears to have made an inference of spoliation by
issuing her decision without attempting to complete the record, we reject the Agency’s argument
as it amounts to a misstatement of the AJ’s actions. The AJ specifically found that the Agency
failed to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the non-selections and as such,
could not overcome Complainant’s prima facie case of reprisal. See Decision on Liability at 11-
13.
                                                 6                                     2022003306

In this case, Complainant engaged in protected activity in 2014 or 2015, and then contacted an
EEO counselor concerning the instant complaint on January 22, 2018, and the Chief and the
Superintendent both became aware of Complainant’s contacting the EEO counselor on February
28, 2018. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 18. We find that the AJ correctly concluded that
Complainant established a prima facie face of reprisal with respect to the non-selection claims
and the performance rating that occurred after February 28, 2018.

Because Complainant established a prima facie case of reprisal, the Agency now has the burden
of producing a legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation for not selecting Complainant. While
we note that an agency’s burden of production is not onerous, it must provide a specific, clear,
and individualized explanation for its selection decision(s). This is required in order for a
complainant to have the opportunity to prove that the asserted reason was a pretext for
discriminatory animus. See Stewart v. Dep’t of Homeland Security (TSA), EEOC Request No.
0520070121 (Nov. 14, 2011) (agency failed to meet its burden of production by simply
explaining the general mechanics of the selection process but failed to provide an individualized
explanation for complainant’s specific score) (citing Boston v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120042074 (May 26, 2004)).

With respect to the non-selection claims, we agree with the AJ that the Agency failed to
articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the non-selections because it did not provide
a clear and individualized explanation as to why Complainant was not referred or selected for the
positions. 5 The Superintendent who made the selections generally stated that he selected the best
qualified candidate from the list of referred candidates. See ROI at 445-46. The Supervisory HR
Specialist stated that there was no referral certificate prepared for the position that should have
opened up after the resignation at issue in claim 5. See ROI at 468-69. However, the
Superintendent stated that he selected the individual (Selectee 1) from the list of referred
candidates. See ROI at 445-46. There is no specific information in the record about Selectee 1’s
qualifications or how Selectee 1 compares with the other applicants or Complainant. With
respect to the non-selection in claim 8, the Supervisory HR Specialist stated that the vacancy
announcement was cancelled. However, the AJ noted that the record contains an SF-82
indicating that someone was, in fact, hired for that vacancy announcement (Selectee 2). See ROI
at 470; 259-61. The Superintendent stated that he made the selection and wanted “someone with
transportation experience, specifically someone with experience working in a[n] [Agency] bus
office” and that Selectee 2 had the required skills and a “positive recommendation from his


5
  To the extent the Agency argues that claim 8 must fail because Complainant erroneously
identified the Chief as the selecting official when it is undisputed that the Superintendent was the
selecting official, we reject the Agency’s argument. The inadvertent error in identifying the
selecting official does is immaterial to Complainant’s establishment of a prima facie case
because both the Chief and the Superintendent were aware of Complainant’s EEO activity in
contacting the EEO counselor about the instant complaint. We further note that with respect to
claim 8, the Superintendent mentions that the selectee in that claim was chosen, in part, based on
the recommendation of his supervisor and the Chief was Complainant’s supervisor so it is
possible the Chief also had some input into the non-selection. See ROI at 451.
                                                7                                     2022003306

supervisor.” See ROI at 450-51. We emphasize, however, that the Superintendent’s statement is
unsubstantiated by the record because while the record includes Selectee 2’s resume, it does not
contain Complainant’s resume or application materials or any information about the other
candidates. See ROI at 290-97. Moreover, to the extent the Superintendent stated he chose
Selectee 2 because he had transportation experience at an Agency bus office, the record
establishes that Complainant also had such transportation experience and had worked at the
Agency’s bus office in Stuttgart, Germany for years. Absent Complainant’s own resume and
application materials or Selectee 2’s other application materials, it is simply not possible to
determine if, in fact, Selectee 2 was better qualified than Complainant. See Clemente v. Dep’t of
Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0720080012 (Sept. 24, 2008) (agency failed to meet burden of
production when it provided description of selection process, generally stated that selectees were
more qualified than complainant, and provided no record clarification of specific qualities that
made selectees better qualified than complainant.).

Moreover, contrary to the Agency’s argument, the non-selection cannot be explained by the fact
that Complainant had already served more than five years in Germany and the Agency has a
general policy limiting civilian employment in foreign areas to five years. At no point either
during the investigation or in his deposition did the Superintendent state that he did not select
Complainant because of the so-called five-year rule. Indeed, the AJ specifically noted that when
asked, the Superintendent could not explain why the five-year rule would preclude Complainant
from being promoted. See Decision on Liability at 12. We note that the Superintendent further
acknowledged that at the time, there was no indication that Complainant would be returning to
the United States due to the five-year rule and that to his knowledge, the five-year rule had not
prevented other employees who had worked in Germany for more than five years from being
promoted. See [Superintendent] Depo. Vol. 2 at 94-95.

Under the circumstances, we cannot find that the Agency has met its burden to explain how it
made its decision either to determine which applicants were referred or why the Superintendent
selected Selectee 1 and Selectee 2 rather than Complainant. We have held that an agency fails to
articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason when it fails to provide specific information to
explain why agency officials assigned their respective ratings or scores to a complainant. See,
e.g., Myles v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0120092511 (Feb. 10, 2011) (agency failed
to meet burden of production when it merely said that complainant was not selected because
Review Panel ranked him lower in scoring because this was not a specific, clear, and
individualized explanation for Complainant’s non-selection); Glomski v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 01955157 (July 17, 1997) (agency failed to meet its burden of production
because it did not provide an explanation of the review committee’s assignment of scores to
complainant and the selectee). We therefore affirm the AJ’s finding that the Agency failed to
articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the non-selections.

With respect to Complainant’s performance rating, claim 6, we further agree with the AJ that the
Agency also failed to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the change in
Complainant’s performance rating from “Exceptional,” the highest possible rating, in fiscal year
2017 to that of “Fully Successful,” the second-highest rating the following year.
                                                 8                                      2022003306

While we acknowledge that the rating system changed between the two years, we find that the
Agency did not adequately explain either the difference between the two rating systems or
provide a specific justification for why Complainant’s rating changed, especially where the
essential performance elements remained largely the same. Specifically, the AJ noted that in
fiscal year 2018, Complainant completed more “Blanket Purchase Agreements” than he had in
fiscal year 2017, but was rated “Fully Successful” on that element rather than the “Exceptional”
he received for completing fewer “Blanket Purchase Agreements” in fiscal year 2017. See ROI
at 247, 250. In addition, in fiscal year 2017, Complainant was rated “Exceptional” for
“perform[ing] quality assurance surveillance,” but then received a “Fully Successful” in fiscal
year 2018 for “diligently perform[ing] quality assurance surveillance.” See ROI at 246, 250.
Notably, the Chief, who issued the ratings, failed to provide an explanation for the change in
ratings except to say that the rating was “the best assessment at the time,” but he was unable to
explain how the change in the rating system would result in the different performance rating nor
did he explain why Complainant would not continue to receive the highest possible rating for
performing at either the same or a better level in fiscal year 2018. See [Chief] Depo. at 35. We
affirm the AJ’s finding that the Agency failed to produce a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for the change in Complainant’s rating.

Having found that the Agency failed to provide legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions with respect to the non-selections and the change in Complainant’s performance rating,
we therefore conclude that the Agency failed to overcome Complainant’s prima facie case of
reprisal and Complainant prevails without having to prove pretext. See Chhe v. Dep’t of
Housing and Urban Dev., EEOC Request No. 0720090008 (Aug. 6, 2010) (the consequence of
an agency’s failure to meet its burden of production under McDonnell Douglas is that the
complainant, having established a prima facie case, prevails without having to make any
demonstration of pretext), request for recon. den. EEOC Request No. 0520100584 (Jan. 27,
2011). We therefore affirm the AJ’s finding that Complainant was entitled to summary
judgment in his favor on the non-selection claims and the claim challenging his performance
rating. 6

Compensatory Damages

As an initial matter, we note that the Agency does not specifically challenge the AJ’s award of
backpay or costs, but only argues that the AJ’s award of nonpecuniary, compensatory damages
of $20,000 was excessive and should be reduced. We therefore decline to disturb the AJ’s award
of backpay and costs.

Non-pecuniary losses are losses that are not subject to precise quantification, i.e., emotional pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional
standing, injury to character and reputation, injury to credit standing, and loss of health.


6
 We note that we are only discussing the basis of reprisal and will not address the other alleged
bases as, under the circumstances, Complainant would not be entitled to any greater relief. See
Willis v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120120339 (Aug. 20, 2013).
                                                 9                                     2022003306

See EEOC Notice No. 915.302, Enforcement Guidance on Compensatory and Punitive Damages
Available Under Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, at 10 (July 14, 1992). There is no
precise formula for determining the amount of damages for non-pecuniary losses except that the
award should reflect the nature and severity of the harm and the duration or expected duration of
the harm. See Loving v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29, 1997).
The Commission notes that non-pecuniary compensatory damages are designed to remedy the
harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than to punish the agency for the discriminatory
action. Furthermore, compensatory damages should not be motivated by passion or prejudice or
be “monstrously excessive” standing alone but should be consistent with the amounts awarded in
similar cases. See Ward- Jenkins v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01961483 (Mar. 4,
1999).

Evidence from a health care provider or other expert is not a mandatory prerequisite for recovery
of compensatory damages for emotional harm. See Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 01952288 (Apr. 18, 1996) (citing Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No.
01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993)). Objective evidence of compensatory damages can include statements
from Complainant concerning emotional pain or suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss
of enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to character or reputation, injury to
credit standing, loss of health, and any other non-pecuniary losses that are incurred as a result of
the discriminatory conduct. Id.

Statements from others including family members, friends, health care providers, other
counselors (including clergy) could address the outward manifestations or physical consequences
of emotional distress, including sleeplessness, anxiety, stress, depression, marital strain,
humiliation, emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, or a nervous breakdown.
Id. Complainant's own testimony, along with the circumstances of a particular case, can suffice
to sustain his burden in this regard. Id. The more inherently degrading or humiliating the
defendant's action is, the more reasonable it is to infer that a person would suffer humiliation or
distress from that action. Id. The absence of supporting evidence, however, may affect the
amount of damages appropriate in specific cases. Id.

An award of non-pecuniary compensatory damages should reflect the extent to which the
Agency's discriminatory action directly or proximately caused the harm as well as the extent to
which other factors also caused the harm. See Johnson v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Appeal
No. 01961812 (June 18, 1998). It is the complainant’s burden to provide objective evidence in
support of his claim and proof linking the damages to the alleged discrimination. See Papas v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01930547 (Mar. 17, 1994); Mims v. Dep’t of the Navy,
EEOC Appeal No. 01933956 (Nov. 23, 1993).

Complainant requested $200,000 in non-pecuniary, compensatory damages for the emotional
suffering Complainant asserted that he suffered over seven years, including an exacerbation of
his pre-existing PTSD. Complainant stated that he suffered depression, mental anguish, loss of
enjoyment to life, injury to professional standing, and loss of self-esteem.
                                                10                                    2022003306

His wife stated that Complainant cried and was visibly upset when people who were less
experienced were promoted instead of him, asserting that this triggered his PTSD and
depression. In support of his request, Complainant submitted affidavits from himself and his
wife, as well as notes from counseling sessions held between August 2021 and February 2022,
which indicate that Complainant was being treated for difficulty sleeping, PTSD, and depression.
The AJ found, however, that the counseling sessions occurred several years after the
discriminatory events in question and moreover, that the notes do not contain any mention of
work difficulties as the cause of Complainant’s issues. The AJ concluded that the counseling
notes were essentially irrelevant to Complainant’s claim for damages.

We agree with the Agency that the AJ’s award of $20,000 was excessive in light of the harm
Complainant suffered due to the Agency’s retaliatory non-selections and performance rating. To
the extent Complainant argued that he was entitled to greater damages because of the distress he
suffered for years and due to his being required to return to the United States, leaving his family
behind in Germany, we note that the five-year rule which necessitated his return to the States is
not a claim in this case and there is no indication that the Agency’s discriminatory actions in
2018 led to Complainant’s being required to return to the United States. The counseling notes
indicate that Complainant himself attributed his issues to his difficulty in adjusting to “the
culture of guns and high crime rate that exist in the United States,” his fears of racism, and
stating that his PTSD was triggered by reminders of his military experiences. See Counseling
Notes at 45, 42, 12. Moreover, the notes indicate that Complainant dated his trouble sleeping
from 2020, due to his severe sleep apnea. See Counseling Notes at 37. There is no mention in
the Counseling Notes of Complainant’s work that indicates that Complainant’s symptoms may
be attributed to the Agency’s discriminatory actions. Rather, we find that the evidence indicates
that any effect the Agency’s discriminatory actions had in exacerbating Complainant’s PTSD
and depression was minor. In addition, we note that the non-selections and the performance
rating were discrete incidents which occurred in 2018 and Complainant’s performance rating in
2018 was “Fully Successful,” and only 0.1 lower than that required for an “Outstanding” rating.
Finally, Complainant was promoted to the GS-09 level in June 2020, so the evidence does not
establish that Complainant suffered lasting harm to his professional standing or reputation nor is
the evidence supportive of Complainant’s claim of years of emotional distress.

We therefore find that an award of $10,000 is adequate to compensate Complainant for the harm
he suffered as a result of the Agency’s retaliatory non-selections in 2018 and his 2018
performance rating. We find that this award reflects the evidence in the record of the harm
Complainant suffered and is consistent with prior Commission precedent. See Cleo S. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2019003273 (awarding $10,000 where the complainant stated
that she suffered migraine headaches, depression, and anxiety due to the Agency’s
discrimination); Chara S. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001100 (July 16,
2020) ($6,000 awarded in non-pecuniary compensatory damages where agency’s discrimination
resulted in exacerbation of several conditions including severe emotional distress, anxiety, and
panic attacks); Complainant v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0710140025 (Sept. 28,
2015) (affirming an AJ’s award of $7,500 where complainant testified that she experienced
depression, anxiety, crying spells, sleeplessness, humiliation and embarrassment).
                                               11                                    2022003306


While Complainant may feel that he is entitled to more, we find that this award considers the
nature of the Agency’s actions, the degree of harm Complainant experienced, and the amount of
supporting evidence Complainant offered. We further note that nonpecuniary, compensatory
damages are designed to remedy the harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than to
punish the agency for the discriminatory action. We therefore modify the AJ’s award of
compensatory damages and award Complainant $10,000 in non-pecuniary, compensatory
damages.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we REVERSE the Agency’s final order, AFFIRM the AJ’s
Decision on Liability, and MODIFY the AJ’s Decision on Liability and Remedies.

                                       ORDER (D0617)

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial actions:

   1. Within 60 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall pay to Complainant
      back pay and all associated benefits plus applicable interest, in accordance with EEOC
      Management Directive 110, Chapter 11, Section III (Aug. 5, 201) and 5 C.F.R. §550,805,
      for the difference between the GS-07, step 1 and GS-09, step 1 rates from April 1, 2018
      to one day prior to his promotion to GS-9, step 1.

       Complainant shall cooperate in the Agency’s efforts to compute the amount of back pay
       and benefits due, and shall provide all relevant information requested by the Agency. If
       there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of back pay and/or benefits, the Agency
       shall issue a check to the Complainant for the undisputed amount within sixty (60)
       calendar days of the date the Agency determines the amount it believes to be due. The
       Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute. The
       petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the
       address referenced in the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's
       Decision."

   2. The issue of Complainant’s increased tax burden from the Agency’s lump sum payment
      of back wages is remanded to the Agency. On remand, the Agency shall conduct a
      supplemental investigation, including providing Complainant an opportunity to submit
      evidence of his increased tax burden. For guidance on what evidence is necessary to
      prove pecuniary damages, the parties are directed to EEOC Enforcement Guidance:
      Compensatory and Punitive Damages Available Under § 102 of the Civil Rights Act of
      1991 (July 14, 1992) (available at eeoc.gov.). The Agency shall complete the
      investigation and issue a final decision appealable to the EEOC determining the
      appropriate amount of damages.
                                               12                                     2022003306


   3. Within 60 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall pay Complainant
      $10,000 in non-pecuniary compensatory damages, and $3,104.40 in pecuniary damages.

   4. Within 60 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall expunge from
      Complainant’s Official Personnel File (OPF), (electronic and hard copy, if any), and all
      other Agency systems of record, Complainant’s Fully Successful performance evaluation
      for the period covering May 1, 2017-April 30, 2018, and replace with a version reflecting
      an “Outstanding rating” in all Elements and an overall rating of “Outstanding”.

   5. Within 90 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide 4 hours of
      interactive training to the Chief and the Superintendent addressing management’s
      responsibilities with regard to eliminating discrimination and reprisal in the workplace.
      For assistance in obtaining the necessary training, the Agency may contact the
      Commission’s        Training     and      Outreach      Division     via     email,    at
      FederalTrainingandOutreach@eeoc.gov.

   6. Within one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
      Agency shall consider taking disciplinary action against the Chief and the
      Superintendent. The Commission does not consider training to be a disciplinary action.
      The Agency shall report its decision to the Commission and specify what, if any, action
      was taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, then it shall set forth the
      reasons for its decision not to impose discipline.

   7. The Agency shall post a notice at the DoDEA Europe Logistics Division in accordance
      with the paragraph entitled, “Posting Order.”


The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its DoDEA Europe Logistics Division copies of the attached
notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency’s duly authorized representative,
shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar
days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for a period of at least 90
consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not
altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
                                                13                                    2022003306

The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the
paragraph entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision,” within 10 calendar days of
the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format, and must be submitted
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY’S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney’s fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.


            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               14                                   2022003306

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                               15                                    2022003306

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


June 14, 2023
Date
