              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013



                                          Maximo C, 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                     Denis R. McDonough,
                                           Secretary,
                                 Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2022004138

                                    Appeal No. 2021002161

                              Agency No. 200P-0664-2020100469

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021002161 (June 25, 2022). EEOC
Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to reconsider any
previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting
party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist
(CRNA), III, at the Agency’s San Diego Medical Center in San Diego, California.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, claiming discrimination and a hostile work environment
(harassment) based on age, disability, and in reprisal for prior protected activity. Complainant
alleged that a Staff Anesthesiologist accused Complainant of taking inappropriate sick leave; the
Chief CRNA asked Complainant inquired as to when Complainant was going to retire and stated,
“we hired two temporary Registered Nurses, trained them, and we want to keep them;” a Staff
Anesthesiologist accused Complainant of making a report to a Compliance Officer; a Staff


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2022004138

Anesthesiologist was upset with Complainant regarding Complainant’s daily schedule; a Staff
Anesthesiologist failed to provide Complainant with written evidence regarding accusations
made against him; a Staff Anesthesiologist failed to address Complainant’s disagreement with
what the rating committee issued him; a Staff Anesthesiologist made several accusations against
Complainant, which were based on two anonymous letters; a Staff Anesthesiologist accused
Complainant of leaving the hospital prior to the end of his shift; a Staff Anesthesiologist accused
Complainant of sleeping on duty and called him an “outlier;” and Complainant was rated as
“unsatisfactory” on “administrative competence” and “personal qualities” on his 2019
performance evaluation.

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the investigative report
and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final agency decision.
Thereafter, the Agency issued a final decision concluding the evidence of record did not
establish any discrimination or harassment. Complainant appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2021002161, the Commission affirmed the Agency’s final order finding no
discrimination or harassment.

In the instant request for reconsideration, we have carefully reviewed Complainant’s arguments
and determine that the matters either were raised or could have been raised below. We note that
during the original appeal from the Agency’s final order, Complainant presented extensive
arguments, many of which have been replicated in the instant request. We emphasize that a
request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A
(Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20,
2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021002161 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of
the Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision.
                                                3                                    2022004138

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the
official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 30, 2022
Date
