             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013

                                      Charles L. Burgett, 1
                                        Complainant,

                                                v.

                                        Janet L. Yellen,
                                           Secretary,
                             United States Department of Treasury
                                  (Internal Revenue Service),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022000489

                                  Agency No. IRS-21-0151-F

                                           DECISION

On October 26, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
September 28, 2021 final agency decision (FAD) concerning his equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.


                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was an applicant, seeking
reemployment with the Agency at its facility in Kansas City, Missouri.

On February 3, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race/sex (African male) and in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:




1
  The Commission typically uses pseudonyms in lieu of a complainant's real name when
publishing its appellate decisions. In this instance, however, Complainant requested that his real
name be used.
                                                2                                     2022000489

       1.      On December 1, 2020, he was not selected for the position of Tax Examining
               Technician, advertised under Vacancy Announcement (VA) No. 2CIN-SBX0178-
               0592-05;
       2.      On December 28, 2020, he was not selected for the position of Contact
               Representative, advertised under VA No. 20KSC-WIX0317-0962-05; and
       3.      On January 4, 2021, he was not selected for the position of Tax Examining
               Technician, advertised under VA No. 20KSC-WIX0761-0592-5-7.

In his complaint, Complainant alleged that the Kansas City agency management and the
Washington, D.C. Human Capital Office is engaging in a pattern and practice of racial and
retaliatory animus and conspiracy toward him. The pertinent record shows that Complainant
applied for the Tax Examining position noted in claim 1. He did not receive an interview. He
was notified by the Human Resources Office that he was not selected. The Program Manager
was the selecting official (SO1) for the day shift position at issue in claim 1. SO1 indicated that
he did not know Complainant’s race, nor was he aware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity. The
Management and Program Analyst was the selecting official (SO3) for the swing shift position at
issue in claim 1. SO3 acknowledged that Complainant did not receive an interview and further
stated that no interviews were held for any of the positions. SO3 asserted that they used the
“guidance on considering past performance and misconduct of former [Agency] employees in
the hiring process.” She explained that the Automated Labor/Employee Relations Tracking
System (ALERTS) is a system utilized by the Employment Operations staff to review the prior
Agency performance and conduct record of qualified applicants for an external announcement.
SO3 advised that they did not rehire Complainant because his name appeared on the ALERTS
list. The ALERTS list was included in the record and reflected that the names of 16 candidates
were listed, including Complainant’s name, for his prior termination during the probationary
period. Investigative File (IF), Exhibit 7.

Regarding claim 2, the selecting official (SO2) stated that he selected all of the candidates
referred to him, except for those on the ALERTS list. Complainant’s name was listed for his
prior termination during his probationary period. IF at 215, Exhibit 16. The record shows that he
was Terminated During Probationary/Trial Period, effective May 20, 2012. IF at 93. Exhibit 30
in the record contains the suitability determination.

Regarding claim 3, the record showed that Complainant was referred as eligible, but he did not
appear on the Best Qualified List. SO2 stated that no interviews were conducted, but he selected
all applicants who were referred to him by the Human Resources Office except for those whose
names appeared on the ALERTS list, which included Complainant. Thus, the Agency explained
that Complainant was not rehired along with 15, 31, and 16 other applicants for the three
positions respectively.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ).
                                                3                                    2022000489

When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In the FAD, the Agency assumed that Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination and reprisal and found that Agency officials articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Specifically, Complainant was not considered for
selection for the three vacancies because he was on the ALERTS List for applicants who had
previously been terminated for misconduct, as was Complainant. SO3 affirmed that they
followed the Human Resources Office’s selecting official guidance that stated that anyone
removed for misconduct was ineligible for rehire unless the selecting official followed the rehire
process by obtaining Commissioner approval to rehire an applicant with an Alert. SO3 further
explained that this ALERTS check process was completed by the three selecting officials and
they chose to not select any applicants that had alert issues. Complainant failed to proffer
credible evidence that management’s testimony was unworthy of belief or motivated by
discriminatory or retaliatory animus. As a result, the Agency found that Complainant was not
subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.

This appeal followed.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant says “the FAD is predicated on an inadequate investigation, is
inconsistent with the facts, and is contrary to EEO law.” He also questions the Agency’s use of
the ALERTS system for him and believes that the Agency’s reasons for not rehiring him are
pretextual. Accordingly, Complainant requests that the Commission reverse the FAD.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

As an initial matter, Complainant claims on appeal that the investigation was inadequate and not
based on the facts in the record. Upon review of the entire record, the Commission is not
persuaded that the investigation into Complainant’s complaint was incomplete or improper. We
note that Complainant withdrew his hearing request, a process which would have afforded him
the opportunity to conduct discovery and to cure alleged defects in the record.
                                                4                                    2022000489

Thus, despite the above referenced arguments, the Commission determines that the investigation
was properly and adequately conducted.

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is usually examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated
in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, he or
she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited
consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for its actions. See Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products,
Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993);
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

We will assume arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and
reprisal. In this case, however, the Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
its actions. Complainant was deemed unsuitable for rehire because his name appeared on the
Agency’s ALERTS list. Agency officials followed the Human Resources Office’s guidance and
decided not to select anyone who appeared on the ALERTS list, including Complainant.

Complainant now bears the burden of establishing that the Agency's stated reasons are merely a
pretext for discrimination. Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6,
1996). Complainant can do this directly by showing that the Agency's proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981).

In the absence of evidence of unlawful discrimination, the Commission will not second guess the
Agency's managerial decisions. Tx. Dept. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 259. It is not
the function of this Commission to substitute its judgment for that of management officials who
are familiar with the needs of their facility, and who are in a better position to make decisions,
unless other facts suggest that proscribed considerations of bias entered the decision-making
process. See Shapiro v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996), citing
Bauer, 647 F.2d at 1048; see also Allen v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01A52639
(Aug. 10, 2005) (personnel decisions and should not be second-guessed by the reviewing
authority absent evidence of unlawful motivation).

As Complainant did not request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's final credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the
Commission can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. We find
that the record is adequate.     The Commission further finds no persuasive evidence that
Complainant's protected classes were a factor in any of the Agency's actions.
                                                5                                    2022000489

At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance
of the evidence that the Agency's reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on
the basis of discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Complainant failed to carry this burden. As a
result, the Commission finds that Complainant has not established that he was subjected to
discrimination or reprisal as alleged.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                6                                     2022000489

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 26, 2023
Date
