             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Linda A., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Christine Wormuth,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of the Army,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022000831

                                Hearing No. 570-2021-00683X

                            Agency No. ARCEHECSA20FEB01152

                                          DECISION

On December 1, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. Two days after
Complainant filed her appeal, the Agency issued a final order implementing the EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ)’s finding no discrimination. 2




1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  Though Complainant filed her appeal prematurely, we find that her appeal is ripe upon the
Agency’s issuance of its final decision. See Mirta L. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal
No. 2020001116 (Mar. 23, 2021) (finding premature appeal to be perfected upon the issuance of
the agency’s final decision).
                                                 2                                     2022000831

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Procurement
Analyst, GS-1102-14, at the Agency’s Directorate of Contracting in Washington, D.C.
As a Procurement Analyst, Complainant’s duties included developing and implementing various
acquisitions programs, interpreting higher-level contracting policies and directives, providing
guidance and assistance to contracting personnel, reviewing proposed acquisition regulations,
and participating in the implementation of formal contracting training programs. See Report of
Investigation (ROI) at 74-80. She was directly supervised by the Chief of Strategic Operations
(Chief). 3 Id. at 106 and 121. The Director of Contracting (Director) led the directorate and served
as Complainant’s fourth level supervisor. Id. 4

In June 2019, Complainant was hospitalized due to an undiagnosed condition and took leave for
approximately six weeks. See ROI at 133. According to Complainant, when she returned to
work, the Chief’s “initial response was for [Complainant] to get the help [that she needed] and to
make sure that [she] had the tools need[ed] to telework and guidelines for telework.” Id. at 111.
The Chief ultimately allowed Complainant to telework beginning October 11, 2019, after
receiving a medical note from Complainant’s medical provider that indicated that Complainant
had a medical need to telework. Id. at 72.

In November 2019, the Chief allegedly informed Complainant over the telephone that she would
be sending reasonable accommodation forms to her because the Chief had allegedly gotten into
trouble for accepting notes from Complainant’s physicians. See ROI at 44 and 108. The
following month, the Chief formally notified Complainant by memorandum dated December 5,
2019, that if Complainant wished to continue full-time telework, Complainant needed to submit
a formal request for reasonable accommodation no later than January 6, 2020. Id. at 49.
Complainant timely submitted the request and provided medical documentation in support of her
request, which indicated that Complainant could not drive or engage in prolonged standing due
to frequent dizziness, chronic headaches, cervical radiculopathy, and impaired fasting glucose.
Id. at 73.

On January 31, 2020, the Director issued a memorandum instituting a new directorate-wide
telework policy. ROI at 84-87. In issuing the memorandum, the Director expressed her desire to
utilize telework to allow for “discretionary workplace flexibility.” Id. However, the Director
emphasized that telework was not an entitlement and categorically forbade supervisors, military,
and administrative personnel and anyone on alternate work schedules from participating in
regular and recurring telework. Id. The Director required employees desiring telework on
medical grounds to file a separate request for “medical telework.” Id.



3
  The Chief formally held the title of Supervisory Procurement Analyst. ROI at 120.
4
  Though Complainant declared in her affidavit that the Director was her third level supervisor,
we note that both the Chief and the Director maintained that the Director was Complainant’s
fourth level supervisor. ROI at 121 and 128.
                                                3                                    2022000831

Following the issuance of the Director’s memorandum, the Chief formally responded to
Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation on February 6, 2020. ROI at 83. While the
Chief acknowledged that the effects of Complainant’s impairments caused Complainant to
“experience frequent dizziness and have trouble driving and standing for prolonged periods of
time,” the Chief determined that Complainant was not entitled to full-time telework as a
reasonable accommodation “due to the existence of employee van pools commuting between
[Complainant’s] residential area and [her] work site, [which provided Complainant] alternatives
to driving daily to work.” Id. In denying Complainant’s request, the Chief emphasized that the
needs of the office required Complainant’s in-person presence. Id. As Complainant worked an
alternate work schedule, the Chief informed Complainant that Complainant was not eligible for
telework under the new telework policy that the Director signed on January 31, 2020 and ordered
her to report to work in-person by March 2, 2020. Id.

On February 28, 2020, Complainant initiated EEO contact to begin the process for filing a
discrimination complaint. ROI at 10. During the informal complaint process, the Director
informed the Agency’s EEO Office that while she would not allow Complainant to telework full-
time, she was willing to purchase a scooter for Complainant to get to work. Id. at 13 and 123.
Complainant, however, declined the alternate accommodation and was “really bothered” by the
proposal. Id. at 117-18. Complainant recalled that she specifically told the Director that she did
not have the physical strength to get the scooter on and off or to get to the Uber and employee
van pool vehicles that she needed to take each morning and evening. Id. She emphasized that she
did not want to be responsible for a government owned scooter. Id.

On May 4, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (African American), color (black), age (over 40),
sex (female), and disability (physical), 5 when on February 6, 2020, 6 she was denied a reasonable
accommodation by her first and fourth level managers. 7

During the EEO investigation, Complainant acknowledged that she was able to commute to work
in person by using paid rideshare services, the employee van pool, and public transportation to
get to the office; however, she noted that on her first day back to the office, she experienced
“three episodes” while “working and walking around with [the Chief].” ROI at 11 and 107.



5
   Though Complainant’s disability had not yet been diagnosed at the time of the EEO
investigation, the record reflects that Complainant alleged that she experienced limited mobility
as well as frequent dizziness, chronic headaches, cervical radiculopathy, and impaired fasting
glucose. ROI at 73, 101, and 107.
6
   The record shows that the Agency emailed Complainant its decision on her request for
reasonable accommodation on February 6, 2020, not February 4, 2020, as indicated. ROI at 82-
83.
7
  In the Agency’s notice of acceptance, the Agency incorrectly referred to Complainant’s fourth
level supervisor as her second level supervisor. ROI at 33. We have reframed the claim to correct
this error.
                                                4                                     2022000831

Complainant recalled that the Chief volunteered to take her to the metro station to ensure her
safety. Id.

She emphasized that her duties could be performed at home and maintained that she
“successfully completed all assignments and executed the mission requirements” and kept the
Chief fully apprised of her activities while teleworking full-time. ROI at 110. Complainant
asserted that the Chief treated her less favorably than similarly situated employees and
maintained that the Chief’s decision to deny her request for reasonable accommodation
unnecessarily placed her safety and life in jeopardy. Id. at 11 and 107

The Chief did not deny Complainant’s assertion that Complainant “was able to perform the
essential functions of her position without accommodation” and acknowledged that she had
allowed Complainant to telework “for a number of months” prior to Complainant’s request for
reasonable accommodation. ROI at 123. The Chief emphasized, however, that she denied
Complainant’s full-time telework as a reasonable accommodation because the medical
documentation that Complainant provided “did not state that [Complainant] was unable to
commute to the office.” Id. Given that Complainant “had previously taken a van pool and metro
to the office,” the Chief determined that the Agency was not obligated to grant Complainant full-
time telework as a reasonable accommodation. Id.

The Director added that she did not make the decision to deny Complainant’s request for
reasonable accommodation and maintained that she merely informed the Chief of the
documentation that was needed to process the request. ROI at 130.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC AJ. In
accordance with Complainant’s request, the matter was assigned to an AJ.

On August 16, 2021, the AJ assigned to the matter determined sua sponte that the complaint did
not warrant a hearing and consequently proposed to issue a decision without a hearing in favor of
the Agency. The Agency responded to the AJ’s proposal by urging the AJ to rule in its favor on
the grounds that it had effectively accommodated Complainant and did not subject her to
disparate treatment. Complainant, however, vehemently opposed the AJ’s proposal.

In arguing that the Agency unlawfully denied her reasonable accommodation, Complainant
emphasized that her commute did not solely consist of the employee van pool. Complainant
asserted that to get to work, she needed to use rideshare services to get to the employee van pool,
which, in turn, took her to the metro station. She then walked 1.5 blocks from the metro station
to her office. Complainant reiterated that her commute would cause her to experience “multiple
episodes” and emphasized that “[s]ome episodes were so bad that [she] was off [her] feet for up
to five days.” Given how her disability affected her mobility, Complainant argued that the
offered accommodations were not effective.
                                               5                                    2022000831

Furthermore, Complainant characterized the Director’s offer of a scooter, as a “blatant disregard
for an understanding and intent of the physical burden that [she] would have to undergo in
accepting the [reasonable accommodation] offer from [the Director].” 8
Over Complainant’s objections, the AJ issued a decision on November 4, 2021, finding that the
Agency’s denial of Complainant’s request for full time telework as a reasonable accommodation
was not discriminatory because the Agency had legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for
denying Complainant’s request. In so finding, the AJ acknowledged that “Complainant disagreed
wholly with management’s actions.” However, the AJ ultimately determined that Complainant
failed to demonstrate pretext because her allegations were mostly based on her perception that
the Director was “not a fan of telework” and nothing in the record showed that the Agency
deviated from its established policies and procedures or treated Complainant less favorably than
similarly situated employees. As the AJ found the offered alternate accommodations to be
effective, the AJ concluded that the Agency did not engage in a discriminatory manner when it
exercised its “ultimate discretion to choose between effective accommodations.”

Complainant filed her appeal prior to the Agency’s issuance of a final order. Two days later, the
Agency issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant did not submit any contentions in support of her appeal.

The Agency opposes the appeal and requests that we affirm its final order. In so arguing, the
Agency maintains that it provided Complainant with effective alternate accommodations and did
not subject her to disparate treatment. The Agency emphasizes that Complainant is not entitled to
the accommodation of her choice.




8
  We note that Complainant alleged in her opposition that the Chief subjected her to various acts
of reprisal following her engaging in protected EEO activity, such as lowering her performance
appraisal for Fiscal Year 2020. She alleged that despite her attempts to amend her complaint to
include these allegations, the Agency failed to do so. While we are mindful of Complainant’s
claims of reprisal, we are disinclined to remand the complaint as Complainant has not, on appeal,
specifically challenged the AJ’s decision to only address the sole claim accepted by the Agency.
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 at Chap. 9,
§ IV.A.3 (Aug. 5, 2015) (noting Commission’s discretion to only review issues specifically
raised on appeal).
                                                6                                     2022000831

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that
a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other
words, we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and Agency’s factual
conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment
discrimination statute was violated. See id. at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo
standard of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions
of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding
that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision
without a hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed.
R. Civ. P. 56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge
determines no genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards.
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment
motion, the judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to
weighing the evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the
non-moving party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s
favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for
the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip.
Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the
outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
We carefully reviewed the record and find that it is adequately developed. To successfully
oppose a decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of record that are
in dispute or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute. Here, Complainant
has not done so. Accordingly, the AJ properly issued a summary judgment decision.
                                                 7                                     2022000831

After a careful review of the record, however, we find that the AJ erred in issuing a decision
without a hearing in favor of the Agency. We note that the AJ, in finding no discrimination,
appears to have applied the three-part disparate treatment analysis first enunciated in McDonnell
Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), to a claim alleging the denial of reasonable
accommodation. While the McDonnell-Douglas analysis is appropriate when determining
whether a complainant was subjected to disparate treatment based on his or her disability, a
complainant does not have to prove that the agency was motivated by discriminatory animus to
prevail on a claim concerning reasonable accommodation. Rather, under the Commission’s
regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical and
mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the agency can show that
accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p). Complainant
has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that she was a qualified
individual with a disability. The Agency, in turn, has the burden of establishing undue hardship.
In applying the proper standard, we agree with the AJ that summary judgment is indeed
warranted, but we conclude that Complainant is the prevailing party for the reasons discussed
below.

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

Under the Commission’s regulations, an agency is required to make reasonable accommodation
to the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§
1630.2(o) and (p). To prevail on her denial of reasonable accommodation claim, Complainant
must show that: (1) she was an individual with a disability; (2) she was a qualified individual
with a disability; and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC
Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the
Americans with Disabilities Act (Reasonable Accommodation Guidance), No. 915.002 (Oct. 17,
2002).

The threshold question is whether a complainant was an individual with a disability within the
meaning of the regulations during the relevant period. An individual with a disability is one who:
(1) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities;
(2) has a record of such impairment; or (3) is regarded as having such an impairment. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1630.2(g). Major life activities include such functions as caring for oneself, performing manual
tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working, and the operation of
a major bodily function. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). An impairment is a disability if it substantially
limits the ability of an individual to perform a major life activity as compared to the ability of
most people in the general population. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ii). As the record contains two
medical opinions indicating that Complainant had 1) a medical need to telework, and 2) could
not drive or engage in prolonged standing due to frequent dizziness, chronic headaches, cervical
radiculopathy, and impaired fasting glucose, we find that she was an individual with a disability
during the relevant period. ROI at 72-73. Complainant averred that her specific disability was
not known at that time because, due to COVID-19, her Neurologist’s office had stopped testing.
ROI at 107.
                                                 8                                      2022000831

However, she indicated that due to her dizziness and severe lightheadedness, she began to walk
with a cane to make sure she did not fall. Id. Based on the evidence, we determine that
Complainant is substantially limited in the major life activity of walking, as reflected in the fact
that she used a cane to walk. See Latarsha A. v. Fed. Energy Regul. Comm’n., EEOC Appeal
Nos. 0120123215 & 0120131079 (Mar. 15, 2016) (finding that complainant established that they
were substantially limited in the major life activity of walking, as reflected in the fact that she
often uses a cane to walk); see also Interpretive Guidance on Title I of the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 29 C.F.R. Part 1630 (Interpretive Guidance), 1630.2(i) (walking is a major life
activity) and 1630.2(j) (an individual is substantially limited if she is significantly restricted in
her ability to perform a major life activity as compared to the average person in the general
population).

As Complainant has met the threshold requirement that would entitle her to the protections of the
Rehabilitation Act, she must now show that she was a “qualified” individual with a disability
within the meaning of 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). The regulation defines such an individual as a
disabled person who, with or without a reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential
functions of the position in question. Given the Chief’s admission that Complainant “was able to
perform the essential functions of her position without accommodation,” we find Complainant to
be a qualified individual with a disability. ROI at 123.

The burden now shifts to the Agency to provide case-specific evidence showing that it would be
an undue hardship to grant Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation. See
Reasonable Accommodation Guidance. Our review of the record here shows that the Chief
originally denied Complainant’s request for full-time telework because the Chief determined that
the needs of the office required Complainant’s in-person presence and there were alternative
accommodations in the form of rideshare services and public transportation that Complainant
could effectively use in lieu of her requested accommodation. ROI at 83. Ultimately, we find the
Agency’s arguments to be unpersuasive.

Undue hardship must be based on an individualized assessment of current circumstances that
show that a specific reasonable accommodation would cause significant difficulty or expense. A
determination of undue hardship should be based on several factors, including:

    • the nature and cost of the accommodation needed;

    • the overall financial resources of the facility making the reasonable accommodation; the
       number of persons employed at this facility; the effect on expenses and resources of the
       facility;

    • the overall financial resources, size, number of employees, and type and location of
       facilities of the employer (if the facility involved in the reasonable accommodation is
       part of a larger entity);
                                               9                                   2022000831

    •   the type of operation of the employer, including the structure and functions of the
        workforce, the geographic separateness, and the administrative or fiscal relationship of
        the facility involved in making the accommodation to the employer; and

    • the impact of the accommodation on the operation of the facility.

After reviewing the record, we are unable to discern how Complainant’s request for full time
telework would constitute an undue hardship. We note that Complainant had been full-time
teleworking for a number of months and that the Chief asked Complainant to submit a request
for a reasonable accommodation if she wished to continue full-time telework. ROI at 49. By the
Chief’s own admission, she had allowed Complainant to telework “for a number of months”
prior to Complainant’s formal request for reasonable accommodation, and Complainant “was
able to perform the essential functions of her position without accommodation.” ROI at 123. We
note that the Chief, in denying, Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation, made no
mention of any challenges faced by the Agency as a result of allowing Complainant to telework.
Id. at 83. Given the lack of specificity, we find the Chief’s claim of undue hardship to be
unsupported, as we are unable to discern how the Agency would face undue hardship in
continuing Complainant’s request to telework as she had “for a number of months.”

Furthermore, we find the Chief’s denial of Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation
“due to the existence of employee van pools commuting between [Complainant’s] residential
area and [her] work site” to be invalid because this alternative did not effectively address
Complainant’s limitations. While we acknowledge that Complainant previously used the
employee van pool, as well as rideshare services and public transportation, to commute to work,
we note that Complainant clearly stated that she suffered medical episodes as a result of having
to commute to work. As the Agency never disputed the claimed effects of Complainant’s
commute on her health and wellbeing, we discern no reason to question her assertions and
ultimately find the offered alternative accommodation to be ineffective.

Finally with regard to the Director’s offer to purchase a scooter for Complainant, given that
Complainant’s medical records clearly stated that Complainant could not drive or engage in
prolonged standing due, in part, to her frequent dizziness and chronic headaches, and that she
needed to use a cane when walking, we fail to envision how Complainant would operate a
scooter on public streets and/or sidewalks and lift it in and out of rideshare and employee van
pool vehicles. For these reasons, we also find this alternative accommodation to be ineffective.

Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act by failing
to reasonably accommodate Complainant’s disabilities.
                                               10                                    2022000831

Disparate Treatment

We note that Complainant alleged that the denial of her request for reasonable accommodation
was also based on her race, color, age, and sex. Upon careful review of the AJ’s decision and the
evidence of record, as well as the parties’ arguments on appeal, we conclude that the AJ correctly
determined that the preponderance of the evidence did not establish that Complainant was
discriminated against by the Agency on the bases of her race, color, age, or sex, as alleged.

Compensatory Damages

Where a discriminatory practice involves the provision of a reasonable accommodation, damages
may be awarded if the Agency fails to demonstrate that it made a good faith effort to provide the
individual with a reasonable accommodation for his or her disability. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(a)(3);
Gunn v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120053293 (June 15, 2007). In this case, we find
that the Agency did not act in good faith. We are particularly troubled by the Chief’s decision to
deny Complainant’s request for full time telework based on generalized claims about the needs
of the office. We are also troubled by the Chief’s decision to deny Complainant’s request based
on the existence of employee van pools without considering the impact of such an
accommodation on Complainant’s health and wellbeing. And, finally, we find the Director’s
offer to purchase a scooter for Complainant to be particularly insensitive and clearly, not a good
faith effort at accommodating Complainant. We therefore find that compensatory damages are
warranted.

                                        CONCLUSION

We AFFIRM in part the Agency’s final order implementing the AJ’s finding of no
discrimination on Complainant’s claim of disparate treatment. However, we REVERSE the
Agency’s final order regarding Complainant’s denial of reasonable accommodation claim and
REMAND the matter to the Agency for further processing in accordance with the ORDER
below.

                                            ORDER

The Agency shall take the following actions.

   1. The Agency shall within thirty (30) calendar days, if not immediately, take all steps
      necessary to provide Complainant with effective reasonable accommodation, to include
      allowing her to telework full time.

   2. The Agency shall determine the amount of compensatory damages to which Complainant
      is entitled and pay Complainant that amount:
                                            11                                    2022000831

       a. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
          shall conduct a supplemental investigation with respect to Complainant’s claim of
          compensatory damages in connection with her claim that she was denied a
          reasonable accommodation as alleged in claim (2).

               i. The Agency shall allow Complainant to present evidence in support of her
                  compensatory damages claim. See Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC
                  Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993).

               ii. Complainant shall cooperate with the Agency in this regard, including by
                   responding to Agency requests for information and by completing any
                   Agency forms. Complainant shall reply to any Agency requests for
                   information within 30 calendar days.

       b. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the completion of the supplemental
          investigation, the Agency shall issue a final decision, with appeal rights to the
          Commission, addressing the issue of compensatory damages.

       c. Within sixty (60) calendar days of determining the amount of compensatory
          damages due Complainant, the Agency shall issue a check to Complainant for the
          undisputed amount.

3. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
   provide four hours of training to the Chief of Strategic Operations (Supervisory
   Procurement Analyst), and the Director who are identified on pages 120 and 127 of the
   ROI. The training shall address the Agency’s obligations under the Rehabilitation Act
   with respect to reasonable accommodation requests. The required training shall address
   unlawful disability discrimination, with a special emphasis on management’s obligation
   under Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act to reasonably accommodate individuals with
   disabilities. The Commission does not consider training to constitute disciplinary action.
   For assistance in obtaining the necessary training, the Agency may contact the
   Commission’s Training and Outreach Division via email, at
   FederalTrainingandOutreach@eeoc.gov.

4. Within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date this decision is issued
   the Agency shall consider disciplining the Chief and the Director. The Commission does
   not consider training to be disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the
   Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it shall identify the
   action taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, it shall set forth the
   reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline. If the Chief has left the Agency’s
   employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of her departure date.

5. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
   post a notice in accordance with the Statement entitled “Posting Order.”
                                               12                                    2022000831

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include evidence that the corrective action has been implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at the Agency’s Directorate of Contracting (Washington, D.C.)
copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly
authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the
Agency within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain
posted for sixty (60) consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices
to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said
notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is
to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation
of the Commission's Decision," within ten (10) calendar days of the expiration of the posting
period. The report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO
Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY’S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), she/he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney’s
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
                                                13                                    2022000831

The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the
Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29
C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has
the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph
below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil
action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline
stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil
action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                14                                     2022000831

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances

               COMPLAINANT'S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency's final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency to
continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from
the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which the
Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or
your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on your
complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full
name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 15                                     2022000831

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 15, 2023
Date
