             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Luvenia S., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of Defense
                                (Defense Intelligence Agency),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022001275

                                Hearing No. 570-2022-00332X

                                  Agency No. DIA208800092

                                          DECISION

On January 8, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 23, 2021, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Defense
Intelligence Analysis Program Analyst, GS-12, at the Agency’s Directorate of Operations in
Washington, DC.

On September 4, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (Black 2) and sex (female) when, she was denied a


1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
  Complainant did not identify her race in her formal complaint or list sex as a basis for her
complaint. However, during counseling she identified her race as Black and added sex as a basis
for her complaint.
                                               2                                    2022001275

promotion to GG-13 from 2011 to 2014 on three separate occasions, even though her supervisors
wrote excellent annual reviews and strongly supported a promotion based on her performance.

The Agency accepted the complaint and conducted an investigation which produced the
following pertinent facts.

Complainant testified that she was initially hired under the Occupational Advancement Program
(OAP), which allowed for promotion up to GG-13 on a non-competitive basis. She said, in her
early years with the Agency she was promoted from GG-9 to GG-12 as promised. However, the
OAP was discontinued so she was required to compete for her promotion to GG-13.
Complainant applied for promotion to GG-13 multiple times between 2011 to 2014 by
submitting the Readiness Assessment Form. She maintained that even though her supervisors
wrote excellent annual reviews and strongly supported a promotion based on her performance,
the Agency repeatedly denied her promotion. Complainant alleged that her race and sex were
factors in her being denied a promotion to GG-13 because she was the only African American in
the office and everyone who was promoted was White. She further alleged that officials who
made the promotion decisions were all White men. When asked to identify the comparators who
were promoted to GG-13, Complainant stated that she did not recall their names.

Human Resource Manager explained the promotion process. She stated that promotions were not
automatic, when a candidate was ready for promotion, they filled out the Readiness Assessment
Form, a supervisor and a reviewer made independent assessments of their performance, and then
the next person up the chain of command would make the ultimate decision on whether the
candidate should be promoted.

The record contains two Readiness Assessment Forms, one from 2012 and another from 2014.
The 2012 Readiness Assessment Form lists five criteria that candidates had to meet for
advancement: (1) completion of training requirements, (2) completion of the competency
assessment tool, (3) completion of the individual development tool, (4) their current performance
must be at a level of “successful” or higher, and (5) they must demonstrate that they met general
requirements for the next grade.

In the 2012 Readiness Assessment Form, Supervisor 1 (Iranian, female) recommended
Complainant for promotion. Supervisor 1 described that Complainant met requirement 4 because
was at “full performance” and did a good job. Supervisor 1 stated that she based her review on
how Complainant performed tasks under her supervision at Persia House and whether
Complainant accomplished the Agency’s mission. After reading Reviewer 1’s comments on the
form, she declared that Reviewer 1 focused on Complainant’s skillset in the intelligence field.
She noted that she was not a specialty expert in Complainant’s specific position, but Reviewer 1
was.

Reviewer 1 (Caucasian, male) was the Deputy Chief of the Directorate of Operations. He
indicated that Complainant did not meet the requirement number 5 i.e., she did not meet general
requirements for a GG-13 position.
                                                 3                                   2022001275

He indicated intelligence officers at the GG-13 level were required to build actionable products
using data, tools, and methodologies. He said these were non-negotiable, essential skills, and to
the best of his knowledge, Complainant did not produce any specific, deliverable products using
transactional data during that period.

Decision maker 1 (Caucasian, male) was the Chief of the Directorate of Operations in 2012. He
stated that he denied Complainant’s promotion to GG-13. Decision Maker 1 said that he relied
on Reviewer 1’s comments because Reviewer 1 was a more senior employee than Supervisor 1,
and Reviewer 1 mentioned that even though Complainant did not meet the requirements for full
performance at the GG-13 level, he would pair Complainant with a senior employee to help her
improve her work so that she would become more proficient and competitive for promotion to
GG-13.

In 2014 Complainant submitted a Readiness Assessment Form for promotion to GG-13. At that
time, she was on a detail assignment at the Office of the Director of National Intelligence
(ODNI). Supervisor 2 (Caucasian, male) was Complainant’s direct supervisor at ODNI. He
stated that she “did a good job” and recalled that although he was not familiar with her office’s
standard for a GG-12 as compared to ODNI’s but she performed well by ODNI standards, so he
recommended her for promotion.

Decision Maker 2 disagreed with the recommendation. Decision Maker 2 served as the Chief of
Directorate of Operations in 2014, and opined that Complainant needed to take on more complex
assignments and responsibility to be eligible for promotion.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation. The Agency also provided her with a Notice of her rights. The Notice
was dated September 9, 2021, and it notified Complainant of her rights. It stated the following:

       You have 30 calendar days from receipt of this notice to request either a hearing
       before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge
       (AJ) or a final agency decision based on this record. If a hearing is elected before
       an AJ, the enclosed Request for a Hearing (enclosure 4) must be sent directly to
       the EEOC via the EEOC Portal.

                                             *   *    *

       Should you decide not to request an EEOC hearing, you may request a final
       Agency decision on the merits of the complainant by returning the enclosed
       Election Form to the undersigned within 30 calendar days of your receipt of this
       Notice. The Agency will have 60 calendar days from the date of receipt of your
       request to review the case file and to issue the final Agency decision. If you do
       not respond within 30 calendar days of receipt of this letter, the Agency Director
       of EEO, or designee, will render a decision on the record as it stands.
                                                4                                  2022001275

                                            *    *   *

When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In the final decision (FAD) issued on December 23, 2021, the Agency determined that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

Complainant appealed the Agency’s decision and requested an AJ hearing. On March 4, 2022,
the AJ dismissed the hearing request because the Agency had previously issued a FAD. The AJ
noted that Complainant had appealed the matter to the Office of Federal Operations, and
correctly identified that Complainant was not permitted to submit a hearing request under the
circumstances.

Complainant submitted statements with her appeal. She alleged that, contrary to the AJ’s
decision, the Agency informed her that she had a right to request an AJ hearing if she disagreed
with FAD. She admits that she “allow[ed] the Agency to make [its final] decision,” however she
clarified that she did so “believing [she] could still have a hearing.”

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Hearing Request

On appeal, Complainant contends that the AJ’s dismissal of her hearing request should be
reversed. Complainant argues that the Agency informed her that she had a right to request an AJ
hearing after the FAD was issued. Complainant did not submit any evidence to support her
argument. And the Notice in the record contradicts with her argument. The Notice shows that on
September 9, 2021, she was informed that she had 30 days to file a hearing request. The Notice
also stated and that if she did not file a response within 30 calendar days, the Agency would
issue a FAD. The Agency’s Notice was sufficient to put Complainant on notice that she risked
forfeiting her right to a hearing if she did not request a hearing in a timely manner. Given the
foregoing, we find that the AJ’s dismissal was proper.
                                                5                                     2022001275

Disparate Treatment

Claims of disparate treatment are reviewed under the three-part analysis set forth in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Under this analysis, a complainant initially must
establish a prima facie case of discrimination. A complainant may do so by presenting facts
which, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a
prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See St. Mary's Honor
Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 507 (1993); Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450
U.S. 248, 252-53 (1981); McDonnell Douglas 411 U.S. at 802. The burden then shifts to the
agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep't of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the
complainant has the responsibility to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency's action was based on prohibited considerations of discrimination, that is, its articulated
reason for its action was not its true reason but a sham or pretext for discrimination. See Hicks,
509 U.S. at 511; Burdine, 450 U.S. at 252-5 3; McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804.

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, the
Agency witnesses articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s not
promoting Complainant to GG-13.

In 2012, Reviewer 1 stated intelligence officers at the GG-13 level were required to build
actionable products using data, tools, and methodologies. He said these were non-negotiable,
essential skills, and Complainant did not show these skills in 2012.

In 2014, Decision Maker 2 stated that Complainant needed to take on more complex assignments
and responsibility for promotion to GG-13.

Because the Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the burden
shifts to Complainant to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's
reason was a pretext for discrimination. Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such
weaknesses, inconsistencies, or contradictions in the Agency's proffered legitimate reasons for its
action that a reasonable fact finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. See Opare-
Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007).
                                                  6                                   2022001275

In an effort to show pretext, Complainant asserts that her comparators were treated more
favorably because they were promoted to GG-13. However, when asked to identify the
comparators who were promoted to GG-13, Complainant stated that she did not recall their
names. We cannot draw an inference of discrimination without knowing who the comparators
are. Notably, Complainant did not rebut Reviewer 1’s reason for not promoting her or Decision
Maker 2’s reason. Therefore, she failed to establish that she was subjected to disparate treatment.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                7                                     2022001275

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

                 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 24, 2023
Date
