             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Alice J., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021004058

                                Hearing No. 430-2019-00487X

                              Agency No. 2004-0613-2017102454

                                          DECISION

On July 12, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 10, 2021, final Agency decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Nuclear Medicine
Physician, GS-15, with the Imaging Service for the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in
Martinsburg, West Virginia.

On March 30, 2017, Complainant contacted an EEO Counselor regarding unlawful
discrimination and a hostile work environment. On May 4, 2017, Complainant filed a formal
complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to discrimination and a hostile work
environment based on religion (Muslim) and sex (female).


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2021004058

On June 21, 2017, the Agency issued a Notice of Partial Acceptance on Complainant’s complaint
noting she alleged that she was subjected to a hostile work environment based on religion
(Muslim) and sex (female) consisting of 15 separate events. The Agency found four of the
events listed were timely raised discrete acts and accepted them for investigation as
independently actionable claims of disparate treatment (events 1, 13, 14, and 15).

Complainant filed an objection to the Notice of Partial Acceptance. On July 27, 2017, the
Agency issued a Response to Disagreement with Notice of Partial Acceptance noting
Complainant disagreed with the framing of four of the events listed, and requested to add the
basis of retaliation to her complaint. The Agency stated it would make the changes necessary as
stated in Complainant’s disagreement letter and issue a new notice of partial acceptance.

A Revised Notice of Partial Acceptance was issued on July 27, 2017, framing Complainant’s
complaint as alleging she was subjected to a hostile work environment based on religion
(Muslim), disability, sex (female), and in reprisal for protected EEO activity as evidenced by
fifteen events. The Agency accepted five events for investigation as independently actionable
claims of disparate treatment (events 1, 12, 13, 14, and 15) and stated that all the events would be
considered as part of Complainant’s overall harassment claim.

Complainant filed an amendment to her complaint dated July 26, 2017. Complainant requested
the following two events be added to her complaint: on June 30, 2017, the Agency summarily
suspended Complainant’s clinical privileges and notified her that it is considering permanently
revoking her clinical privileges; and on July 10, 2017, the Agency initiated a summary review of
Complainant’s employment as a probationary employee. Complainant stated these two events
were a direct continuation of the pattern and practice of harassment previously raised. Further,
she noted the harassment had escalated, “with the termination of [her] employment and
revocation of her clinical privileges now the apparent goal.” Complainant argued the new claims
were like or related to those raising during counseling and should be added to the claims already
accepted for investigation.

On July 27, 2017, the Agency issued a Notice of Amendment of the EEO Complaint,
acknowledging receipt of Complainant’s amendment. The Notice stated that the current
accepted claim, as indicated in the Revised Notice of Partial Acceptance letter dated July 27,
2017, is one of hostile work environment consisting of 15 events and five disparate treatment
claims. The Notice acknowledged that on July 26, 2017, Complainant requested her complaint
be amended to include two additional events based on religion and sex. The Agency found the
new claims like or related to those raised in the original complaint. The Agency defined the
amended complaint as containing the following claims:

Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment based on religion (Muslim), disability,
and sex (female) as evidenced by the following events:

   1. In November 2015 and ongoing, Supervisor of Nuclear Medicine (Supervisor), and Chief
      of Imaging Service (Chief), became uncooperative and aggressive towards the
                                         3                                  2021004058

   Complainant after learning she was a Muslim and proceeded to change her position by
   removing her supervisory, leadership, and other duties; and cancelled her supervisor
   training, which undermined and denigrated her amongst her peers as a physician that's
   supervised by a technologist.

2. On February 23, 2016, Supervisor failed to respond to the Complainant’s emails
   regarding patient care.

3. On February 25, 2016, Complainant felt threatened when she asked Supervisor to leave
   her office after they had a meeting regarding a position disagreement.

4. From June 2016 to December 2016, Chief was amused when Complainant informed her
   that someone was placing candy wrappers in her inbox and commented “infantile.”

5. In October 2016, Complainant’s performance was underrated by Chief when she used the
   incorrect scoring system.

6. From December 2015 to December 2016, Supervisor ignored Complainant’s warning of
   multiple patient care and performance behavior issues. At one point Complainant was
   forced to apologize for reporting a patient care issue.

7. In December 2016, Complainant was denied pay for performance and her request for a
   pay panel review was also denied.

8. In January 2017, Chief denied Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation.

9. On March 28, 2017, Chief embarrassed the Complainant during a meeting when she
   dismissed her concerns about patient care.

10. On March 30 and 31, 2017, Supervisor communicated in an angry tone “you only want to
    win. I'm done with you” after Complainant voiced her concerns about appropriate
    patients released processes.

11. In April 2017, Chief accused Complainant of over-usage of Family Medical Leave Act
    (FMLA) and taking unauthorized time off.

12. In April 2017, during a Human Resource meeting with Chief, Complainant’s personal
    medical information was disclosed to the group.

13. On April 24, 2017, Complainant’s credential file was not presented during a meeting
    which caused a delay in her renewal privileges.
                                                4                                    2021004058

   14. On May 22, 2017, Chief initiated a review of Complainant’s work product, manipulated
       the review, and refused to submit her application for renewal of clinical privileges and
       credentials to the Executive Committee of Medical Staff.

   15. On June 1, 2017, the Acting Chief of Staff handed the Complainant a letter of
       investigation for her work performance.

   16. On June 30, 2017, Senior Management summarily suspended the Complainant’s clinical
       privileges and notified her of a proposal to permanently revoke her clinical privileges.

   17. On July 10, 2017, Senior Management initiated a summary review of Complainant’s
       employment as a probationary employee.

The Agency accepted events 1, 12, 13, 14, and 16 for investigation as timely independently
actionable claims of disparate treatment. The Agency noted these events were sufficiently
related to the overall pattern of harassment that they would be included for consideration in the
analysis of the overall harassment claim (events 1 - 17).

Complainant’s complaint was assigned for investigation on August 23, 2017. Investigator 1
conducted an investigation from August 31, 2017, to October 6, 2017. The investigative report
was submitted to the Regional EEO Officer on October 9, 2017.

On February 15, 2019, the Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication
(OEDCA) sent the matter for a supplemental investigation to the Office of Resolution
Management (ORM). It was noted the supplemental investigation was needed due to the first
investigator not using a revised version of event 14; failing to investigate the bases of race,
disability, and reprisal; and failure to investigate the additional accepted events in claims (16)
and (17). The matter was assigned for investigation on March 4, 2019. Investigator 2 conducted
an investigation from March through April 2019. The report was submitted to the Regional EEO
Officer on April 19, 2019.

On July 10, 2019, Complainant requested a hearing on her complaint. The case was assigned to
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). On September 11, 2019, the AJ dismissed Complainant’s
hearing request and remanded the matter to the Agency for issuance of a final decision.

On June 10, 2021, the Agency issued a final decision on Complainant’s complaint. In its
decision, the Agency stated that at the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant was notified
of the right to request a hearing by an EEOC AJ or an immediate final decision without a
hearing. Specifically, the Agency stated that “Complainant acknowledged receipt of that notice
on October 27, 2017.”
                                                5                                    2021004058

The Agency stated that when Complainant failed to respond to the notice, the file was forwarded
to OEDCA for an immediate final decision. 2 Further, the Agency stated the record indicated that
Complainant was subsequently terminated from her position effective August 4, 2017. The
Agency noted that documentation from ORM shows that Complainant did not follow the “proper
channels” she was instructed to follow in order to amend her complaint while it was pending
hearing or to initiate a new complaint by calling the EEO counseling line. Thus, it noted ORM
did not accept Complainant’s termination claim via amendment or investigate the removal as
part of Complainant’s discrimination and harassment claim in this case. The Agency analyzed
events 8, 12, 13, 14, and 16 as independently actionable claims and events 1 - 17 as an overall
harassment claim. The Agency found Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to
discrimination or harassment as alleged.

Thereafter, Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

A critical issue in this appeal is whether or not Complainant properly sought to amend her
complaint while it was pending before the Agency to add a claim of unlawful removal. The
Agency found Complainant did not properly amend her complaint.

Although Complainant had not been removed from the Agency at the time she filed her EEO
complaint in May 2017, both parties acknowledge that she was subsequently removed from the
Agency on August 4, 2017. We note on July 27, 2017, the Agency accepted Complainant’s
initial amendment request in which she alleged that on June 30, 2017, her clinical privileges
were suspended and that the Agency was considering permanently revoking her clinical
privileges; and on July 10, 2017, Senior Management initiated a summary review of her
employment as a probationary period. In her July 26, 2017 letter requesting to amend her
complaint, Complainant stated, “the harassment has escalated in severity, with the termination of
[Complainant’s] employment and revocation of her clinical privileges now the apparent goal.”

The record shows that on September 1, 2017, Complainant emailed the EEO Counselor assigned
to her case stating she wanted to add her separation from the Agency on August 4, 2017, to her
complaint. In a September 5, 2017 response, the EEO Counselor informed Complainant that as
her complaint was not in the informal stage, he was no longer involved with it. He noted that she
should let the assigned investigator know of any additional alleged incidents she wished to add to
her complaint. The record reveals that on September 5, 2017, Complainant sent an email to
Investigator 1 stating she would like to add her separation from the Agency effective August 4,
2017, to her complaint. The record shows that the investigation by Investigator 1 was still
ongoing at that time.



2
  The Agency stated that OEDCA later learned from ORM that Complainant had actually
requested a hearing before an AJ, but her hearing request was dismissed, and the complaint was
remanded to OEDCA for final decision.
                                                 6                                      2021004058

However, we note there is no indication Complainant received a response to her September 5,
2017 email to Investigator 1 seeking to amend her complaint to include her removal.

In its final decision, the Agency contends that Complainant was notified of the right to request a
hearing before an EEOC AJ or an immediate final decision from the Agency without a hearing.
Specifically, in an April 8, 2019 email from Person A of ORM to Investigator 2, Person A states
that on October 23, 2017, Complainant received the AOR [Advisement of Rights] Notice and on
October 27, 2017, Complainant sent an email to Counselor Team Lead, ORM, North Atlantic
District (NAD2) regarding her removal. However, we note the record does not contain the
purported October 23, 2017 Notice.

Further, we note in its final decision, the Agency claims that “Complainant acknowledged
receipt of that notice [AOR] on October 27, 2017.” The record contains an October 27, 2017
email, Complainant sent to NAD2, in which she again notes, that since filing her EEO complaint
in April 2017, she has been removed from her position in retaliation for filing a complaint and
for disclosing a safety issue making her case a mixed case. Complainant stated when she filed
her complaint it was not initially categorized as a mixed case and inquired how she could fix the
issue. In response, Person A notified her that she did not have standing to file with the Merit
Systems Protection Board (MSPB) and thus, the matter was not a mixed case. Further, regarding
her removal, Person A notified her that, “The current status of your EEO claim is pending a
hearing which means the investigation has concluded, therefore you have two options of
addressing this new claim: a. You can elect to file a motion to amend the removal claim as a like
and related claim to your original claim with the EEOC Administrative Judge, if you elect a
hearing[;] or b. You can initiate another EEO Complainant [sic] for the new claim by contacting
the EEO center.” To the extent the Agency claims this was adequate notice to Complainant of
her rights, we find it is not. First, we note the email itself is confusing since it states both that
Complainant’s EEO complaint is pending a hearing and also that she can elect a hearing on her
complaint. Second, we note the email does not inform Complainant of the appropriate time
frames and procedures for requesting either a hearing and decision from an AJ or an immediate
final decision from the Agency. Third, we note there is no indication that Complainant was
provided a copy of the report of investigation at this time.

In addition, we note the Agency’s final decision stated documentation from ORM “shows that
Complainant did not follow the proper channels she was instructed to follow in order to amend
her complaint while it was pending hearing or to initiate a new complaint by calling the EEO
counseling line.” The Agency stated as a result, ORM did not accept Complainant’s removal
claim via amendment or investigate that event as part of Complainant’s discrimination and
harassment claim. However, we find this argument ignores the fact that Complainant had
already requested, in September 2017, to amend her complaint to include her removal with both
the EEO Counselor who previously handled her informal complaint and the investigator, who at
the time, was investigating her complaint.
                                                 7                                      2021004058

Finally, we note the record contain a March 12, 2018 email from Person A (EEO Case Manager
in ORM) to Investigator 2 in which Person A explained that the removal claim from
Complainant’s attorney in July 2017 was not written as an additional claim but was vaguely
worded as “an apparent goal.” Person A stated “there were no documents forwarded from the
attorney to support the claimant was terminate[d]; therefore, it was not added to the amendment.”
To the extent Person A is claiming that the amendment was denied because Complainant failed
to include evidence she was actually terminated, we find this an improper basis to deny an
amendment. Where a complainant alleges she was removed from the Agency due to a protected
basis, such a statement is sufficient to state a cognizable claim of discrimination. If it turned out
a complainant was not actually removed when they filed a complaint, the Agency, could, if
appropriate, dismiss a complaint for failure to state a claim. However, we find it would be
improper to prohibit a complainant from filing such a claim just because she failed to provide
evidence she had actually been terminated.

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(d) provides that a complainant may amend a complaint
at any time prior to the conclusion of the investigation to include issues or claims like or related
to those raised in the complaint. We note in her original and supplemental affidavits,
Complainant alleged that many of the events were taken to have her removed from the Agency.
Specifically, regarding event (7), Complainant claimed that Chief supported Supervisor “by
undermining me and eventually removing me from my position.” Regarding event (13), she
stated that instead of giving her a reasonable accommodation, “management started [a]
conspiracy to remove me.” Further, regarding her overall harassment claim, Complainant stated
that she believed this “was an ongoing effort to create [a] hostile work environment and push me
out of [my] job.” Upon review, we find the removal claim, which Complainant expressly raised
during the EEO investigation, was clearly like or related to the issues raised in her original
complaint and should have been accepted by the Agency as an amendment and investigated.

As the Agency did not properly process Complainant’s complaint, the Commission has
determined that the final decision should be vacated and the complaint should be remanded to
the Agency for a supplemental investigation on the removal claim and issuance of a new final
Agency decision with appropriate appeal rights.

                                          CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency's final decision is VACATED and the complaint is REMANDED to
the Agency for further processing in accordance with this decision and the Order herein.

                                              ORDER

The Agency is ordered to take the following actions:

   1. The Agency shall ensure its investigator completes a supplemental investigation of the
      removal claim within 90 days of the date this decision is issued. The supplemental
      investigation shall include affidavits from Complainant and relevant Agency officials, as
                                                8                                     2021004058

       well as documentation related to Complainant’s removal from employment and any other
       related documentation.

   2. Within 90 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall issue Complainant a
      copy of the Report of Investigation that includes all matters in Complainant’s ongoing
      harassment claim, including the claim of removal.

   3. Within 60 days of the issuance of the new Report of Investigation, the Agency shall issue
      a new final decision on all Complainant’s ongoing harassment allegations, including the
      removal claim, with appropriate appeal rights. A copy of the final report of investigation,
      as well as the new final Agency decision, must be sent to the Compliance Officer as
      referenced herein.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                                9                                    2021004058

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 10                                     2021004058

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 22, 2023
Date
