                U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                              Office of Federal Operations
                                     P.O. Box 77960
                                Washington, DC 20013


                                            Todd S., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                        Merrick B. Garland,
                                         Attorney General,
                                       Department of Justice,
                                             Agency.

                                      Appeal No. 2021004657

                                   Agency No. EOI-2020-02119

                                            DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 22, 2021, final
decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final
decision.

                                         BACKGROUND

Complainant worked as an Immigration Judge, IJ-3, at the Executive Office of Immigration
Review (EOIR) Field Office in Harlingen, Texas. On November 25, 2020, Complainant filed an
EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of race (Black)
and national origin (Nigeria) by not selecting him for the position of Appellate Immigration Judge
(AIJ) on August 7, 2020. 2

AIJs are selected using a multi-step hiring process that was described by the Chief Administrative
Hearing Officer. These procedures were established by the Attorney General and included the
following:


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
    AIJs are also referred to as members of the Board of Immigration Appeals.
                                             2                                      2021004657

1. Vacancy announcements for AIJs are posted on USAJOBS. Application packages are
   submitted to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).

2. OPM forwards to the EOIR lists of applicants who meet EOIR’s minimum qualifications.

3. For AIJ vacancies, the candidates referred by OPM are sorted into two tiers – “recommend”
   and “do not recommend” for further consideration.

4. Candidates in the “recommend” tier are interviewed by panels established by the Board of
   Immigration Appeals. Those interviews are good for any vacancies that occur within one
   year of the interview.

5. The panelists forward their applicant evaluations to the EOIR Director. The process
   requires only that the panelists evaluate applicants before forwarding the application
   materials and their evaluations to the EOIR Director. It does not require the panelists to
   provide rankings or scores. The Director reviews the applications of all candidates
   evaluated by the panelists, regardless of their evaluations.

6. The EOIR Director then forwards a sufficient and appropriate number of applicants to the
   Finalist Panel. The Finalist Panel typically consists of three members. One member is
   from the Department’s Justice Management Division; the second member is designated by
   the Office of the Deputy Attorney General; and the third is designated by the EOIR.
   Multiple individuals from each component are typically designated to serve in order to
   provide flexibility in constituting Finalist Panels, and multiple Finalist Panels can be
   established to conduct interviews.

7. The Finalist Panel is allowed to interview as many of the forwarded applicants as it deems
   appropriate, though in practice the Finalist Panel interviews all of the forwarded applicants.

8. Following those interviews, the Finalist Panel will either recommend or not recommend to
   the EOIR Director an applicant for a vacancy.

9. The EOIR Director will then consult with the Office of the Deputy Attorney General and
   the Office of the Attorney General about each recommended candidate.

10. Based upon those consultations, the EOIR Director will make an initial conditional offer
    to an applicant. The offer is conditional upon the candidate’s successful completion of a
    preliminary or full background check, as well a final selection and appointment by the
    Attorney General.

11. Once an applicant accepts a conditional offer, successfully completes a background check
    and receives approval from the intermediate Department components – EOIR, the Office
    of Attorney Recruitment and Management, Legal Counsel, and the Office of the Deputy
    Attorney General, manifested through consideration and approval of an appointment
                                                  3                                      2021004657

       memorandum – the Attorney General may appoint the applicant as an AIJ. The Attorney
       General retains full discretion of the selection and appointment of all applicants for AIJ
       positions.

IR 247-48, 605-09, 624-26. According to the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer, there were
two vacancy announcements that ran in 2020. The first vacancy announcement ran in January
while the second opened in April. The Chief Administrative Hearing Officer averred that he served
as the EOIR Director for both announcements. IR 248-58.

The Chief Administrative Hearing Officer asserted that the initial panel forwarded the names of
12 applicants, including Complainant, to the Finalist Panel. The Finalist Panel interviewed
Complainant on March 31, 2020 and considered him to be an average candidate for the AIJ
position. IR 249, 629. On April 6, 2020, after the Finalist Panel completed all 12 interviews, the
Chief Administrative Hearing Officer consulted with the offices of the Deputy Attorney General
and the Attorney General, determined who he believed to be the four best candidates, and
forwarded their names for the final stage of the process. All four were given offers. Three accepted
while the fourth (hereinafter referred to as “Selectee 1”) declined and reapplied under the second
vacancy announcement. The Chief Administrative Hearing Officer affirmed that of the eight
remaining candidates, three presented significantly stronger applications than Complainant. IR
249, 261-63, 267-69, 272-74.

Six of the eight applicants who responded to the January 2020 announcement, including
Complainant and Selectee 1, applied to the April 2020 announcement. The three applicants who
were considered stronger candidates in the first selection process were also among those who
applied for the second. Selectee 1 wanted to work in a different location than the one for which
he had initially been selected. As with the first 2020 vacancy, the Chief Administrative Hearing
Officer received the evaluations from the initial panels in late May 2020. He averred that nothing
substantively had changed regarding the applications of Complainant, Selectee 1, and the three
other candidates considered significantly stronger than Complainant. He further affirmed that
because he knew that the Deputy Attorney General and the Attorney General had previously
regarded those four candidates as stronger than Complainant, there was no reason to forward
Complainant’s application to the Finalist Panel for a second time. Two other applicants to the
second 2020 vacancy who did not apply during the first 2020 vacancy were likewise considered
stronger than Complainant by the review panels who evaluated their applications. Ultimately,
these two individuals (hereinafter referred to as “Selectee 2” and “Selectee 3”) as well as (Selectee
1) were ultimately appointed by the Attorney General. IR 249-52, 255-58, 397-99, 425-27, 438-
40, 460-62, 517-20, 547-58, 560-61, 593, 598, 627.

The investigation of the instant complaint was conducted from December 23, 2020 to April 12,
2021. The investigator stated in a memorandum-to-the-file dated April 12, 2021, that Complainant
declined to provide a rebuttal affidavit, opting instead to wait until he received the entire case file
before doing so. IR 243. At the conclusion of the investigation on April 26, 2021, the Agency
provided Complainant with a copy of the investigative report and notice of his right to request a
hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge.
                                                 4                                      2021004657

Complaint File (CF) 902. On May 17, 2021, Complainant requested that a supplemental
investigation be conducted to gather additional information, including documents that
Complainant contended were deliberately excluded from the evidentiary record. CF 874-94, 914.
In a memorandum dated May 28, 2021, and addressed to Complainant, the EEO Director reported
that additional information had been provided, per Complainant’s request. The EEO Director also
reminded Complainant of his obligation to either request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge or request a final agency decision without a
hearing. That same day, the EEO Specialist provided Complainant with a link for Complainant to
access and download the investigative report. The EEO Specialist requested that Complainant
reply to her confirming receipt and informed Complainant that he should submit his request for a
hearing, final agency decision, or withdrawal via email. CF 899-901, 919-29.

On June 7, 2021, Complainant replied to the EEO Specialist by email as follows:

       This is an acknowledgment of your e-mail today requesting that I make an election
       regarding how I wish to proceed with my EEO Complaint. Please, refer to the
       Notice I sent to [the EEO Director] on or about June 6, 2021 regarding the issues I
       raised with the investigation of this case. In that Notice, I outlined the deficiencies
       inherent in the investigation, including the Agency’s refusal to disclose available
       information in the Agency’s possession necessary to prosecute my case. With all
       due respect, I will neither be coerced nor compelled into making an election without
       the necessary information I requested to make an informed decision. Any election
       the EEO Office makes with respect to the disposition of this case will be without
       my consent.

CF 930. Following Complainant’s response to the EEO Specialist, the Agency forwarded the
complaint, the investigative report, and the supplemental information provided since the close of
the investigation to the Adjudication Officer for issuance of a final decision. The Agency noted
the circumstances regarding Complainant’s refusal to make the election between requesting a
hearing and receiving a final agency decision. In accordance with EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the
decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that he was subjected to
discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

In support of his appeal, Complainant submitted a 160-page brief in which he raised numerous
arguments alleging deficiencies in the investigative report as well as bias on the part of the
investigator, to the point of the investigator giving legal advice to the Agency. In essence,
Complainant takes issue with the Agency’s determination that the Selectees were more qualified
for the AIJ position than he was. In particular, he contends that the Agency violated its own merit
promotion policy by allowing Selectee 2 to serve on his March 31, 2020 Finalist Panel for the first
vacancy. He also contends that the Agency’s EEO Office unilaterally forced him into a final
decision rather than conduct a full and impartial investigation.
                                                 5                                      2021004657

He maintains that evidence which had a direct bearing on whether he was discriminated against
was excluded from the investigative report despite his repeated efforts to point this out to the
investigator. He demands that the Commission enter a default judgment against the Agency as a
sanction for its alleged exclusion and concealment of material evidence.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Complainant’s Request for Sanctions on Appeal

When the complainant, or the agency against which a complaint is filed, or its employees fail
without good cause shown to respond fully and in a timely fashion to requests for documents,
records, comparative data, statistics, affidavits, or the attendance of witness(es), the investigator
may note in the investigative record that the decisionmaker should, or the Commission on appeal
may, in appropriate circumstances:

   (i)     Draw an adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony of the
           requested witness, would have reflected unfavorably on the party refusing to provide
           the requested information;

   (ii)    Consider the matters to which the requested information or testimony pertains to be
           established in favor of the opposing party;

   (iii)   Exclude other evidence offered by the party failing to produce the requested
           information or witness;

   (iv)    Issue a decision fully or partially in favor of the opposing party; or

   (v)     Take such other actions as it deems appropriate.

29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(c)(3); Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R.
Part 1614 (EEO MD-110). Chap. 6, Sec, XI (Aug. 5, 2015). Sanctions serve a dual purpose. On
the one hand, they aim to deter the underlying conduct of the non-complying party and prevent
similar misconduct in the future. Barbour v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC 07A30133 (June 16, 2005).
                                                  6                                     2021004657

On the other hand, they are corrective and provide equitable remedies to the opposing party. Given
these dual purposes, sanctions must be tailored to each situation by applying the least severe
sanction necessary to respond to a party’s failure to show good cause for its actions and to equitably
remedy the opposing party. Royal v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052
(Sept. 25, 2009). Factors pertinent to “tailoring” a sanction, or determining whether a sanction is
even warranted, include: (1) the extent and nature of the non-compliance, including the
justification presented by the non-complying party; (2) the prejudicial effect of the non-compliance
on the opposing party; (3) the consequences resulting from the delay in justice, if any; (4) the
number of times the party has engaged in such conduct; and (5) the effect on the integrity of the
EEO process as a whole. Id. A default judgment is the most severe sanction that can be meted out
to an Agency, and as such, should be reserved only for the most egregious acts of non-compliance.
Owen L. v. Office of Personnel Mgmt., EEOC Appeal No. 2020000990 (July 15, 2021).

None of the factors relevant to the imposition of a sanction come into play here. Complainant’s
assertion that the Agency should be sanctioned has been completely undermined by his own
deliberate decision not to request a hearing when he had the opportunity to do so. The hearing is
an adjudicatory proceeding that completes the process of developing a full and impartial
evidentiary record. It provides the parties with a fair and reasonable opportunity to explain and
supplement the record [emphasis added] and, in appropriate instances, to examine and cross-
examine witnesses. EEO MD-110, Chap. 7, Sec. I (Aug. 5, 2015); Roman G. v. Dep’t of Veterans
Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2022000508 (Dec. 15, 2022); Bill A. v. Dep’t of the Army. EEOC
Appeal No. 0120131989 (Oct. 26, 2016); Bullard v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0720060045 (April 25, 2008). It is the Commission's intent that where a hearing is properly
requested and where there is an incomplete or inadequate investigation, the record in the case
shall be developed under the supervision of the Administrative Judge assigned to the case.
[Emphasis added.] EEO MD-110, Chap. 6, Sec. XII, n. 8. Complainant had the opportunity to
clear up any alleged deficiencies in the investigative report by requesting a hearing and engaging
in discovery but chose not to make that request based upon his apparent misunderstanding of the
purpose of the hearing process as an extension of the investigative process. Under such
circumstances, we cannot find, as Complainant urges, that the integrity of the investigative process
has been so compromised by the Agency’s handling of the investigation as to warrant the severe
sanction of a default judgment or even any of the lesser sanctions outlined in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(c)(3). Moreover, the Commission finds that this investigation developed a sufficient
record for a fact finder to address the ultimate issue of whether discrimination occurred. We now
move on to address the merits of Complainant’s claim.

Disparate Treatment

To prevail on his disparate treatment claim, Complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary
scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802
(1973). His first step would generally be to establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he
was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Const. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978).
                                                  7                                      2021004657

The prima facie inquiry may be dispensed with in this case, however, since the Agency articulated
a legitimate and nondiscriminatory reason as to why Complainant was not selected for the AIJ
position in August 2020. See U.S. Postal Service Bd. of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-
17 (1983). The Chief Administrative Hearing Officer stated that Complainant’s application for
the AIJ position was not as robust as the applications of other candidates, particularly those who
were ultimately selected to fill the second vacancy.

To ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
explanation put forth by the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer and other management
witnesses is a pretext for race and national origin discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing
Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Hon. Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993);
Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981). Pretext can be demonstrated
by showing such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in
the Agency's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact finder could rationally
find them unworthy of credence. Larraine D. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 2022002980
(Oct. 27, 2022).

In non-selection cases, Complainant could demonstrate pretext by showing that his qualifications
for the position were plainly superior to those of the Selectee. Billi D. v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC
Appeal No. 2021004238 (Sept. 27, 2022). We note, however, that agencies have broad discretion
to determine how best to manage their operations, and it is not the function of this Commission
to substitute its judgment for that of management officials who are familiar with the needs of their
facility. Santo D. v. Dep’t of State, EEOC Appeal No. 0120172768 (June 28, 2018).
Consequently, those officials may select candidates with fewer years of experience if they believe
that such candidates are best qualified to meet the needs of the organization. Dovie W. v. Equal
Empl. Opp. Comm’n., Appeal No. 2020004825 (Oct. 17, 2022). According to the Agency’s
records from the two selection processes, Selectee 1 received three “highly recommends” from his
initial interview panel in February. Selectee 2 received two “highly recommends” and one “do
not recommend” from her initial interview panel in May. Complainant received three
“recommends” from his initial interview in February. Although Selectee 3 received one definite
“recommend” from her initial interview panel in May, the other panelists did not say one way or
the other whether to recommend her for further consideration. IR 397-99, 425-27, 438-40, 627.

In a series of memoranda dated June 29, 2020 and addressed to the Attorney General, the Chief
Administrative Hearing Officer presented his reasons for recommending each of the Selectees.
Concerning Selectee 1, the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer stated that he had been a former
prosecutor who had served in three different judicial positions, had been a law professor and had
served as an Immigration Judge since 2009. IR 547-50, 560. As to Selectee 2, the Chief
Administrative Hearing Officer stated that she had served as an Assistant Chief Administrative
Judge in a temporary detail and had performed in an exemplary manner, and that she had a
comprehensive knowledge of immigration law and practice. IR 555-58, 561.
                                                 8                                     2021004657

Regarding Selectee 3, the Chief Immigration Officer stated that she was an Immigration Judge
with over 17 years of experience in immigration and related areas of law, and that she had a broad
base of immigration knowledge, having served as an attorney for Customs and Border Protection
and as an Asylum Officer. IR 551-54, 562.

When asked to compare his qualifications to those of the three Selectees, however, Complainant
did not even attempt to show that his qualifications were plainly superior to those of the Selectees
and the other applicants who advanced further along in the process. Instead, he replied that such
a comparison would be “futile.” IR 233. There is no question that Complainant was well-qualified
to serve as an AIJ. But so were the Selectees and all the other applicants. The evidentiary record
is not sufficient to support a finding of pretext based upon the relative qualifications of the
applicants.

Other indicators of pretext include discriminatory statements or past personal treatment
attributable to those responsible for the personnel action that led to the filing of the complaint,
unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard procedures without explanation
or justification, or inadequately explained inconsistencies in the evidentiary record. Tammy S. v.
Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 2021000578 (May 5, 2022). Complainant averred that the
Agency abandoned merit principles in order to prevent him from competing for an AIJ position on
a level playing field so that it could hire White and Asian applicants. IR 232-33. In particular, he
characterizes the service of Selectee 2 on his Finalist Panel for the first vacancy as a conflict of
interest, emphasizing that Selectee 2 was part of the panel that had characterized his candidacy for
the AIJ position as “average.” IR 235-36. Complainant contends in his appeal brief that Selectee
2 was ineligible to serve on the March 31st Finalist Panel because she was not an AIJ at the time
she sat on that panel. Consequently, according to Complainant, her presence on that panel is
evidence of an intent on the part of management to prevent him from becoming an AIJ because of
his race and national origin. Appeal Brief, p. 43. However, there was no explicit requirement that
panelists had to be AIJs. Selectee 2 was an Assistant Chief Immigration Judge, which was one of
the reasons that she was appointed to the March 31, 2020 Finalist Panel.

This is a complicated promotion process, with many steps and unique features not typically found
in most merit promotion systems. We note that the pretext inquiry is not concerned with bad
judgment, dislike, or a mistake. Marvin W. v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No.
0120170438 (Dec. 12, 2018). Rather, the focus of pretext inquiry is whether an agency's actions
were motivated by discriminatory animus. The affidavits of the Chief Administrative Hearing
Officer and the other individuals who served on various panels firmly establish that the officials
involved in processing the two 2020 vacancies followed the Agency’s merit promotion policy.

Complainant raises and discusses at length numerous contentions regarding the Chief
Administrative Hearing Officer’s decision not to refer him to the Finalist Panel for the second
vacancy. Complainant, however, has presented neither affidavits, declarations or unsworn
statements from witnesses other than himself nor documents that are sufficient to contradict or
undermine the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer’s explanation for recommending the three
Selectees to the Attorney General, as set forth in his memoranda of June 29, 2020.
                                                 9                                      2021004657

Likewise, Complainant has not presented any evidence beyond his own assertions which would
cause us to question the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer’s truthfulness as a witness.

As Complainant chose not to request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the Commission can
only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. At all times, the ultimate
burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the
Agency's reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on the basis of discriminatory
animus. In this case, Complainant failed to carry this burden. Aside from conclusory statements
and his subjective belief, Complainant has not proffered any evidence that the Agency's
explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination. As a result, the Commission finds that
Complainant was not subjected to discrimination as alleged.

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507.
                                                  10                                      2021004657

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely
filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.


                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 11                                     2021004657

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 11, 2023
Date
