             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Avery R., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of Defense
                           (Defense Finance & Accounting Service),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022002194

                                Hearing No. 470-2020-00226X

                                Agency No. DFAS-00005-2020

                                          DECISION

Following its March 16, 2022 final order, the Agency filed a timely appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a). On appeal, the Agency requests that the Commission affirm its rejection of an
EEOC Administrative Judge's (AJ) finding of discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. The Agency also requests
that the Commission affirm its rejection of the relief ordered by the AJ.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Division Chief, GS-
12, Claims Division, Debt & Claims Management Organization (DCMO or Debt & Claims at the
Agency’s HQ Finance Operations DFAS facility in Indianapolis, Indiana.

Factual Background

In April 2018 two female bargaining unit employees, Lead Military Pay Clerk (African
American) and Financial Systems Analyst (Asian), brought complaints against Complainant to


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022002194

the attention of their female union Executive Vice President (Union EVP). They alleged that
Complainant was abusing his power, harassing and bullying subordinates, and manipulating
reports within DCMO. They alleged Complainant was favoring other employees with
preferential assignments and allowing them to stand in between his legs at his desk, belittling
Lead Military Pay Clerk and Financial Systems Analyst, and engaging in other unprofessional
behavior. Union EVP then interviewed approximately ten employees to investigate these
allegations.

Union EVP believed Complainant’s first-line supervisor, the Director of DCMO (Caucasian
female), was aware of these concerns and allowing Complainant’s behavior to occur. Therefore,
she approached Complainant’s second-level supervisor, Director of Finance Operations (African-
American male), with her concerns. Union EVP sent Director of Finance Operations a letter
outlining her findings on or about April 16, 2018.

Director of Finance Operations then instructed a division chief within Debt & Claims (First
Investigator) (African American male) to perform an inquiry in accordance with DFAS
Instruction 1440.3-I, Prevention and Elimination of Unlawful Harassment in the Workplace
(1440 Investigation). First Investigator undertook and completed the 1440 Investigation,
interviewing twelve individuals, including Complainant, Financial Systems Analyst, and Lead
Military Pay Clerk. First Investigator issued a report of his findings around August 30, 2018 (the
First Report). A copy of this report is not contained in the record, but according to the Agency,
First Investigator’s report identified the “Summary of Allegations” as follows:

       Complainant is being accused of harassing Financial Systems Analyst and Lead
       Military Pay Clerk in the following of ways:
         a. Yelling at Financial Systems Analyst in his office and using offensive
              language to describe her.
         b. Using Financial Systems Analyst’s USERID to track OPA errors.
         c. Rejection of OPA cases is retaliation for errors Financial Systems Analyst
              had assigned to a technician on the accused staff.
         d. Manipulating Financial Systems Analyst’s right to assign post audit errors.
         e. Reduction of Lead Military Pay Clerk’s OT hours.
         f. Accusations against Lead Military Pay Clerk to manipulate the Director
              Debt & Claims Management’s perception.
         g. Abusing his power and requesting that Lead Military Pay Clerk’s appraisal
              rating be lowered.
         h. Using a Memorandum for Record (MFR) Lead Military Pay Clerk received
              for behavior as an intimidation tactic.

First Investigator’s 1440 Investigation ultimately found no harassing behavior by Complainant,
but it did find some inappropriate behavior on Complainant’s part. Financial Systems Analyst
and Lead Military Pay Clerk were informed of this in September 2018 and they let Union EVP
know they were not happy with the investigation and did not believe anything was accomplished
by it.
                                                3                                    2022002194

After receiving the First Report, Director of Finance Operations consulted with a former Labor
and Employee Relations employee within DFAS (former LER). Former LER indicated it
sounded like personality conflicts and given Complainant’s lack of prior discipline, he
recommended informal disciplinary actions such as a warning, a verbal reprimand, and moving
Complainant to a different area within Finance Operations.

On October 10, 2018, Director of Finance Operations issued Complainant a Letter of Warning
regarding “inappropriate and unprofessional behavior” based on some of the findings from the
First Report. However, Director of Finance Operations did not move Complainant to another
area. The letter mentioned two incidents involving Financial Systems Analyst and one incident
involving Lead Military Pay Clerk. Complainant signed the letter, stating, “[w]hile I do not agree
with the findings I acknowledge that there is a standard of behavior and I will endeavor to adhere
to those standards.”

Union EVP attempted to obtain a copy of the First Report. In doing so, she contacted Director of
Finance Operations and LER Specialist. Based on those conversations, Union EVP believed the
1440 Investigation had focused only on Complainant’s treatment of Financial Systems Analyst
and Lead Military Pay Clerk, as opposed to his behavior towards Debt & Claims employees as a
whole. Union EVP believed not only that not all of the original allegations investigated, but also
that she was receiving information that Complainant’s conduct was ongoing.

Therefore, in December 2018, Union EVP went above Director of Finance Operations and
contacted DFAS Indianapolis Chief of Staff (Caucasian male) regarding her concerns that the
1440 Investigation was incomplete and there were new allegations of harassing behavior by
Complainant. DFAS Indianapolis Chief of Staff brought this to the attention of Director of
Finance Operations. Director of Finance Operations contacted both the LER Department and the
Office of General Counsel (OGC) for guidance. After going back and forth with LER and OGC,
a decision was made to wait for formal allegations from the union.

Union EVP then sent a second harassment letter to Human Resources Specialist – Anti-
Harassment Program Manager (HR Specialist) (African-American female), the point of contact
for harassment charges at DFAS Indianapolis. After receiving the second harassment letter, it
was determined that the issues of harassment, favoritism, improper hiring and selections needed
to be investigated. OGC recommended that someone outside of Finance Operations be appointed
to conduct the second 1440 Investigation.

DFAS Indianapolis Chief of Staff was to reach across different organizations to select an
investigator. The record does not contain any information as to how or why he made his
selection, but he selected Second Investigator (Caucasian female), a branch chief in Audit
Support for the Army divisions, to conduct the Second 1440 Investigation. She had never worked
in Debt & Claims, nor did she know Complainant. However, her husband had worked in Debt &
Claims prior to Complainant working there.
                                                4                                    2022002194

With guidance from LER, Director of Finance Operations sent Second Investigator a letter
around February 27, 2019 notifying her that she would be conducting the Second 1440
Investigation. Second Investigator also spoke to HR Specialist, who advised her that they were
looking for an unbiased person who did not know any of the parties involved. HR Specialist also
indicated not all of the union’s concerns had been investigated during the prior 1440
Investigation.

Second Investigator then conducted the Second 1440 Investigation, issuing a report to Director
of Finance Operations on May 8, 2019 (the Second Report). Second Investigator found that not
all of the claims against Complainant were substantiated. However, she found that Complainant
acted inappropriately when he spent an excessive amount of time discussing non work-related
matters in the workplace with perceived favorite employees; that certain female employees
would go into Complainant’s office, stand in front of him and proceed to sit on his desk at a very
close distance; several witnesses stated that Complainant acted unfairly and inconsistently with
subordinate employees, and gave preferential treatment to perceived favorite employees;
Complainant disciplined Lead Military Pay Clerk inconsistently compared to the way he
disciplined other employees; berated employees who had received promotions/transfers; and
removed Financial Systems Analyst’s ability to assign errors.

On May 23, 2019, after reviewing the Second Report, and in consultation with LER and OGC,
Director of Finance Operations temporarily detailed Complainant to a non-supervisory, GS-12,
Financial Management Analyst position in Accounting Operations. Director of Finance
Operations decided, with the advice of LER, that it would be best to separate Complainant from
employees who had filed complaints against him in order to protect Complainant, the employees,
and the Agency. Also on May 23, 2019, after counsel from LER and OGC, Director of Finance
Operations removed Complainant from further consideration for the GS-13 supervisory positions
for which Complainant had applied. Director of Finance Operations said he took this action
because he believed disciplinary action could be brought against Complainant based on the
Second Report and that it would be inappropriate to allow Complainant, at the present time, to
potentially be selected for a position in which he would supervise an even larger number of
subordinates.

On September 4, 2019, after consulting with Team Lead HR Specialist, Director of Finance
Operations issued Complainant a Notice of Proposed Suspension for fourteen (14) calendar days
for Inappropriate Conduct during an Inquiry, Lack of Candor, and Conduct Unbecoming a
Supervisor. The charges were based on conduct that had been discovered during the second 1440
Investigation. Some of the conduct had occurred prior to the first 1440 Investigation but was not
discovered until the second 1440 Investigation because it was not within the scope of the first
1440 Investigation. He also presented Complainant with an Alternative to Suspension
Agreement, by which Complainant would accept the charges against him, but serve no
suspension. He would lose no money. However, it would go into his file for three years and he
would not be able to telework for one year.
                                               5                                   2022002194

Complainant chose to appeal the Proposed Suspension, submitting his written appeal on
September 19, 2019 to Deputy Director Indianapolis Network, the Deciding Official.
Complainant made his verbal appeal to the Deciding Official on October 3, 2019.

On October 16, 2019, the Deciding Official issued his Notice of Decision on Proposed
Suspension. Based on the totality of the information provided to him, and after giving
consideration to Complainant’s written and oral reply to the proposed fourteen (14) calendar day
suspension, the Deciding Official decided to reduce it to a two (2) day suspension for Conduct
Unbecoming a Supervisor.

Formal EEO Complaint

On December 2, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
him to continuous harassment and/or unconscious bias creating a hostile work environment for
Complainant and others, and discriminated against him, on the bases of race (Bi-Racial: African
American and Caucasian) and sex (male) when his second level supervisor, Director of Finance
Operations, and others made numerous baseless uncorroborated allegations against him, filed
police reports against him, opened and adjudicated a 1440 investigation, and then reopened the
investigation and steered it to arrive at a conclusion that would have Complainant removed from
consideration for promotion. As a result, Complainant was issued a letter of warning, removed
from consideration for promotion, removed from his position as division chief, given a letter of
proposed suspension, and subsequently given a 2-day suspension. Complainant also alleged there
was inappropriate conduct and behavior by the investigator of the reopened 1440 investigation.
Complainant contended Director of Finance Operations allowed other employees to harass him,
changed Complainant’s performance evaluation, cancelled Complainant’s performance bonus,
and allowed significant time to pass without providing reasoning for Complainant’s removal as a
supervisor.

The Agency ultimately framed Complainant’s formal complaint as follows:

   Whether you were subjected to disparate treatment discrimination based on race
   (African American) and sex (male) by Director of Finance Operations when the
   following occurred:

   1. On November 10, 2019, you were issued a SF-50, removing you from your duties
      as division chief.

   2. On or about September 4, 2019, you received a notice for a proposed suspension
      as a result of the DFAS 1440.3-I, Prevention and Elimination of Unlawful
      Harassment in the Workplace inquiry. You were suspended for two days on
      October 16, 2019, for conduct unbecoming a supervisor.
                                               6                                    2022002194

   3. Between May 24-July 27, 2019, you were removed from consideration for
      promotion to the GS-13, Deputy Director of Debt & Claims position and a lesser
      qualified white male was selected.

   4. On October 10, 2018, you were issued a letter of warning (LOW) for misconduct
      based on a 1440 investigation, investigated by [First Investigator].

   5. On an unspecified date, after you had received your performance appraisal,
      Director of Finance Operations, second-line supervisor, stepped in and
      superceded your first line supervisor’s determination that you exceeded
      expectations, deleted your appraisal, and cancelled your performance bonus.

The Agency accepted Claims 1 and 2 for investigation, but dismissed Claims 3-5 for untimely
EEO counselor contact. However, the Agency’s May 21, 2020 Revised Acceptance Letter
advised that “Claims 3, 4, and 5, will be used as background information in support of your
harassment claim.” (ROI, p. 83).

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ).

AJ Hearing and Decisions

Complainant timely requested a hearing and the AJ held a hearing on May 5 and 6, 2021 and
June 7 and 8, 2021, and issued a bench decision on June 9, 2021. The AJ’s June 9, 2021 Bench
Decision found that: “Complainant has not established that he was subjected to discrimination on
the bases alleged; therefore, a finding of no discrimination is hereby entered.” (Final Hearing
Transcript, June 9, 2021, p. 171). However, the AJ also found that “the second investigation and
the manner in which it was conducted was predicated on discriminatory animus. Although these
aspects of my finding was not part -- was not part of the Complainant's case, this finding was
based on what I extracted during this hearing.” (Final Hearing Transcript, June 9, 2021, pp. 170-
171). The AJ then set a post-hearing conference to address the remedy or damages on the issue
of the second investigation, and provided both sides an opportunity to brief these narrow
findings.

On July 9, 2021, the Agency filed a Motion for Reconsideration of the decision finding the
Agency’s second 1440 investigation, as well as the selection of the investigator was based on
discriminatory animus. On July 23, 2021, Complainant responded, requesting the AJ reconsider
the portion of his decision finding in favor of the Agency. Furthermore, the Complainant argued
that his claim of hostile work environment was not addressed during the hearing. On August 20,
2021, the Agency responded to the Complainant’s claim of a hostile work environment.

On October 25, 2021, a second hearing was conducted on the parties’ Motions. At the end of the
hearing, the AJ issued another bench decision, partially reversing his prior decision.
                                               7                                    2022002194

The AJ denied the Agency’s Motion for Reconsideration. As to Complainant’s Motion for
Reconsideration, the AJ again found Complainant had not proven discrimination based on race.
However, as to Complainant’s claim of discrimination based on sex, the AJ granted the Motion
for Reconsideration and issued a cause finding against the Agency on the basis of sex:

       However, I also find that the Complainant has presented enough evidence to
       suggest that his removal from consideration, his suspension from 14 days to 2
       days, his non -- his reassignment from his supervisory Financial Management
       specialist position to non-supervisory position were predicated on sex, sexual
       allegations leveled against him by those females, by the three females in question.
       Therefore, based on the totality of the evidence presented, I find that the
       Complainant has carried out his burden.

(Hearing Transcript, Oct. 25, 2021, p. 94).

The AJ further found that the Agency’s articulated reason for nondiscrimination was unworthy
of credence, stating that the Agency witnesses “were either lying or presenting information that
were no credible.” (Hearing Transcript, Oct. 25, 2021, p. 103). The AJ then considered
Complainant’s claim for hostile work environment. Complainant’s claim of hostile work
environment based on race was denied. However, the AJ found Complainant had carried his
burden of showing he was subjected to a hostile work environment based on sex.

A post-hearing conference held on November 11, 2021 authorized the parties to conduct
additional discovery on damages. A hearing on damages was held on January 24, 2022.

On February 9, 2022, the AJ issued an Order Entering Judgment, followed by an Amended Order
Entering Judgment. In the Amended Order Entering Judgment, the AJ found as follows:

       For the reasons set forth in the BENCH DECISION dated June 9, 2021,
       beginning from page 3 of the Hearing Transcript, judgment in the above-
       captioned matter was hereby ENTERED in part in favor of the Agency and in
       part in favor of the Complainant. In other words, with regards to the
       Complainant’s claim of discrimination based on race and sex, a finding of no
       discrimination was entered in favor of the Agency. With regards to the Agency’s
       conduct on the second 1440.3 investigation against the Complainant, I find that
       the decision was based on discriminatory motive. In other words, the selection of
       the investigator, as well as the entire investigative framework was based on
       discriminatory animus.

       On July 9, 2021, the Agency filed a MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION of
       the decision finding the Agency’s second 1440 investigation, as well as the
       selection of the investigator was based on discriminatory animus. On July 23,
       2021, the Complainant responded to the Agency’s MOTION FOR
       RECONSIDERATION.
                                        8                                    2022002194

In his response, the Complainant requested the undersigned judge to reconsider
his decision that finds in part in favor of the Agency. Furthermore, the
Complainant argues that his claim of hostile work environment was not addressed
during the hearing. On August 20, 2021, the Agency responded to the
Complainant’s claim of a hostile work environment. On October 25, 2021, a
second hearing was conducted on the parties’ MOTION FOR
RECONSIDERATION.

For the reasons set forth in the BENCH DECISION dated October 25, 2021,
beginning from page 84 of the Hearing Transcript, judgment in the above-
captioned matter is hereby ENTERED in part in favor of the Agency and in part
in favor of the Complainant.

Regarding the Agency’s MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION of the decision
finding that the second investigation, as well as the selection of the investigator
was based on discrimination motive is DENIED.

Regarding the Complainant’s MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION of the
decision dismissing his complaint with a finding of no discrimination is DENIED
in part and GRANTED in part. In other words, the Complainant’s MOTION
FOR RECONSIDERATION of the decision finding no discrimination based on
race is DENIED.

Regarding the Complainant’s claim of discrimination and hostile work
environment based on sex, judgment is hereby ENTERED in favor of the
Complainant.

On January 24, 2022, a hearing was held on damages. For the reasons set forth in
the BENCH DECISION dated January 24, 2022, beginning from page 85 of the
Hearing Transcript, the Complainant is hereby awarded the following remedies in
accordance Albermarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405 (1975); Adesanya v.
U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01933395 (July 21, 1994); 29 CFR
1614.501 (C) (1):
    1. Any and all adverse materials that arose from the second 1440
investigation shall be expunged from the Complainant’s personnel file;
    2. Posting Notice. The Agency is ORDERED to post this Order Entering
Judgment where all the Agency’s employees in the affected facility would have
access to it;
    3. The Agency is FURTHER ORDERED to pay $529 in attorney’s fees;
    4. The Agency is FURTHER ORDERED to place the Complainant back to
the Debt and Claim Management position;
    5. The Agency is FURTHER ORDERED to promote the Complainant to the
GS-13, Deputy Director position or comparable position in Debt and Claims with
                                                9                                    2022002194

       backpay beginning from the time Mr. David Walch was selected for the GS-13
       position in question plus interest and the Agency’s financial contribution;
           6. The Agency is FURTHER ORDERED to pay the Complainant $25,000 in
       Non-Pecuniary Damages;
           7. The Agency is FURTHER ORDERED to award the One Thousand Two
       Hundred ($1200) plus interest in performance award that Mr. Lindsay canceled
       during the period in question.
           8. The Agency is FURTHER ORDERED to arrange a sensitive training for
       the following individuals: […] the Office of General Counsel (OGC) attorney
       involved in the above-mentioned matter, and the affected division.
           9. The Agency is FURTHER ORDERED to cease and desist from engaging
       in the type of discriminatory investigation and conduct similar to the one found in
       this matter.

On March 26, 2022, the Agency subsequently issued a final order rejecting the AJ’s finding that
Complainant proved that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

The Agency filed the instant appeal. On appeal, the Agency requests the Commission set aside
the AJ’s decision on liability and damages and that the Agency’s Final Order rejecting the AJ’s
Decision should be affirmed. In the alternative, the Agency requests the Commission remand the
matter to the Agency to thoroughly investigate the allegation that the thought process behind the
second 1440 Investigation constituted discrimination based on Complainant’s gender. In support
of this, the Agency contends that the AJ’s liability finding that the “thought process” leading to
the second 1440 investigation was discriminatory is not supported by substantial evidence. The
Agency further contends the AJ’s liability finding added a claim that was not contained in the
complaint, investigated during the EEO process, or sufficiently addressed via witness testimony
during the hearing. The Agency also argues that the AJ’s liability finding undermines the
Agency’s obligation to thoroughly investigate claims of harassment. Lastly, the Agency contends
the AJ’s finding regarding damages was an abuse of discretion because it was not based on law
and facts and it was not proportionate to Complainant’s damages.

Complainant contends on appeal that the Agency’s appeal should be denied and the Commission
should uphold the AJ’s Amended Order Entering Judgment in its entirety. In support of this,
Complainant argues the AJ’s decision finding Complainant was subjected to discrimination and a
hostile work environment is clearly supported by substantial evidence in the record. Complainant
contends that even if some of the facts found during the second 1440 investigation were
technically true, the second investigation, as initiated and conducted, discriminated against
Complainant on the basis of sex and constituted a hostile work environment. The Agency argues
there is substantial evidence the reason for instigating the second investigation was “because of”
Complainant’s sex and that the AJ’s references to “thought processes” behind the decision to
undertake the second investigation should be read to refer to the motives of Union EVP,
Financial Systems Analyst, and Lead Military Pay Clerk.
                                                 10                                     2022002194

The Agency also contends the AJ’s liability finding does not undermine the Agency's ability to
thoroughly investigate all claims of harassment, because the AJ specifically found that the
second investigation raised no new claims against Complainant. Lastly, the Agency argues there
is ample evidence in the record to support the awarded damages and the Amended Order is not
unclear.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), all post-hearing factual findings by an AJ will be upheld if
supported by substantial evidence in the record. Substantial evidence is defined as “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.”
Universal Camera Corp. v. National Labor Relations Board, 340 U.S. 474, 477 (1951) (citation
omitted). A finding regarding whether or not discriminatory intent existed is a factual finding.
See Pullman-Standard Co. v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 293 (1982). An AJ's conclusions of law are
subject to a de novo standard of review, whether or not a hearing was held.

An AJ’s credibility determination based on the demeanor of a witness or on the tone of voice of a
witness will be accepted unless documents or other objective evidence so contradicts the
testimony, or the testimony so lacks in credibility that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it.
See EEOC Management Directive 110, Chapter 9, at § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015).

Framing of the Complaint

The Agency argues on appeal that AJ’s liability finding added a claim that was not contained in
the complaint, investigated during the EEO process, or sufficiently addressed via witness
testimony during the hearing. The Agency states the Second 1440 Investigation was not part of
Complainant’s complaint. However, review of Complainant’s formal complaint makes clear that
Complainant raised this issue at the outset, including during EEO counseling. Complainant’s
formal complaint alleged that the Agency reopened the investigation against him and steered it to
arrive at a conclusion that would have Complainant removed from consideration for promotion.
He also alleged inappropriate conduct and behavior by Second Investigator.

It does not appear that Complainant ever challenged the Agency’s framing of his complaint.
Ordinarily, we would find this to be a waiver of Complainant’s right to challenge the framing of
the complaint at a later stage. See Norman v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No.
01A54105 (Oct. 12, 2005) (finding that complainant did not challenge the definition of the
accepted issue until after the report of investigation was completed, and therefore the agency
properly defined the accepted issue); Thomas v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No.
0120073634 (Apr. 3, 2009), req. for recon. den'd, EEOC Request No. 0520090465 (July 7, 2009)
(deciding to not address complainant's claim that her complaint was improperly framed after
complainant failed to respond within seven days of the agency's partial dismissal); Rehder v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120091221 (Jan. 14, 2011) (deciding not to address
                                                11                                    2022002194

disability as a basis after complainant did not object within seven days to the agency's partial
acceptance); Complainant v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120132166 (Sept. 22, 2014)
(complainant waived his opportunity to address the framing of his complaint).

However, here it would be a subversion of the EEO process to allow the Agency to now benefit
from their own improper framing to avoid a liability finding by the AJ on an issue that was
clearly raised in the complaint. Therefore, we will proceed to evaluate the AJ’s decision on this
issue.

Findings

The Agency is challenging the AJ’s liability finding that the Agency discriminated against
Complainant and created a hostile work environment based on his sex because the Second 1440
Investigation was motivated by discriminatory animus predicated on Complainant’s sex and that
this discriminatory investigation resulted in Complainant being reassigned from his supervisory
position, excluded from consideration for the GS-13 promotional opportunity, and the
cancellation of his performance bonus.

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs
v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S.
502 (1993). Complainant must show that the agency's action was more likely than not motivated
by discrimination, that is, that the action was influenced by legally impermissible criteria.
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253; Baker v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Petition No. (May 13, 1999). Absent
a showing that the agency's articulated reason was proffered to mask discrimination, complainant
cannot prevail. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256; Crosland v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Petition No.
03990018 (July 1, 1999); Mongere v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 01970738 (March
18, 1999).

To prove his hostile work environment claim, Complainant must establish that he was subjected
to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's
position would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove
that the conduct was taken because of his sex. Only if Complainant establishes both of those
elements – hostility and motive – will the question of Agency liability present itself. See Henson
v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17,
21 (1993). See also, Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice
No. 915.002 (March 8, 1994).
                                                12                                    2022002194

Applying these analyses for proving discrimination, we find the record is insufficient to allow us
to properly evaluate the AJ’s findings and make a reasoned determination on the merits of
Complainant’s complaint of disparate treatment and hostile work environment harassment based
on his sex. See Ollie L. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2019000141 (Sep. 22, 2020). 2

Here we find the record lacking in several aspects. The specific credibility findings of the AJ
regarding the hearing testimony supporting this finding are unclear. The AJ stated that, “[t]he
Agency throughout this process, the witnesses’ were either lying or presenting information that
were not credible.” (Hearing Transcript, October 25, 2021, p. 103:3-5). However, there is no
clear explanation of who was lying and how the AJ determined this, or which information was
not credible, such that we can properly evaluate the AJ’s credibility determinations and whether
this finding is supported by substantial evidence. The AJ appears to find Director of Finance
Operation’s testimony lacking credibility and appears to be relying on the testimony of Director
DCMO that there were no new allegations, but this is not entirely clear. Although both Director
DCMO and former LER testified they were not aware of any new allegations against
Complainant to warrant a second 1440 investigation, neither was involved in the decision to
undertake either investigation and there is no testimony as to whether they had actual knowledge
of what allegations the union raised in the first harassment letter versus the second harassment
letter or whether they had actual knowledge of what was investigated in the First 1440
Investigation versus the Second 1440 Investigation.

Nor is the record clear enough to allow us to determine whether the AJ’s liability finding is
supported by substantial evidence or to determine whether discrimination occurred. The record
in unclear as to the differences in the harassment complaints brought by the union, and neither
the first harassment letter sent by Union EVP to Director of Finance, nor the second harassment
letter sent by Union EVP to HR Specialist are in the record. The First 1440 Investigation Report
is not in the record and there is no other statement from First Investigator regarding the scope of
his investigation. There is no evidence regarding who actually selected Second Investigator and
why she specifically was selected.

Based on the foregoing, we find that the record before us in inadequate and we have no choice
but to remand this matter for a supplemental investigation.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the final decision of the Agency and REMAND this
matter for further processing in accordance with this decision and Order below.




2
  As there is no appellate challenge to the AJ’s determination that no race discrimination was
established, we will not address Complainant’s race claim any further.
                                                13                                    2022002194

                                             ORDER

Within 30 calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall commence, with
written notification to Complainant, a supplemental investigation into the decision to undertake
the second 1440 investigation developing the evidence as explained in more detail in the body of
this decision. Once evidence in the form of affidavits and documentary evidence has been
collected from management witnesses, the Agency shall give Complainant the opportunity to
provide rebuttal evidence. Within 90 calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the
Agency shall issue the new report of investigation to Complainant and a new notice providing
Complainant the right to request a hearing or an immediate final decision based on the
supplemented record. If Complainant requests an immediate final decision, it shall be issued
within sixty calendar days from receipt of the request.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               14                                   2022002194

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 15                                     2022002194

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 15, 2023
Date
