             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Leona B., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022000774

                                 Hearing No. 460-2020-00189X

                              Agency No. 2003-0580-2019104136

                                           DECISION

On November 24, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 27, 2021 final order concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an ER/LR Specialist,
GS-11, in Human Resources at the Agency’s Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center in
Houston, Texas.

On September 27, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
her to a hostile work environment on the bases of race (African American), disability and reprisal
when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                           2                                   2022000774

1. On June 12, 2019, Acting Human Resources (HR) Officer and Assistant HR Officer
   terminated Complainant’s telework agreement, and directed her to return to duty in the
   office effective June 27, 2019.

2. Between July 1-3, 2019, Assistant HR Officer directed Complainant to share an office
   with a coworker.

3. On July 3 and 9, 2019, Assistant HR Officer failed to engage in the interactive process
   concerning Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation, and then stated to her,
   “[w]hich accommodation are you referring to? From my understanding, you have a long
   list.”

4. On July 9, 2019, Assistant HR Officer stated to Complainant, “[i]f you are taking
   medication that prevents you from driving, why do you need parking,” after he told her
   that she should change her tour of duty in order to receive “prime parking.”

5. On a number of occasions between July 9, 2019, and September 24, 2019, management
   deviated from standard protocol regarding Complainant’s request for reasonable
   accommodation.

6. On July 10, 2019, Assistant HR Officer falsely informed Complainant that a decision
   would be rendered on her request for reasonable accommodation, within 24 hours.

7. On September 5, 2019, Assistant HR Officer stated in an email to Complainant, “[f]irst of
   all -This is unbelievable. Next-I can drive anywhere my vehicle takes me. I have lived in
   this neighborhood since 2005. You are the newcomer. It is none of your business why I
   was driving through my neighborhood or any other neighborhood. Please have a good
   day.”

8. On September 9, 2019, Chief, Employee and Labor Relations Shared Services Center
   (Chief LR/ER), VISN 16, informed Complainant that it was her practice not to approve
   leave without pay (LWOP), outside of statutory entitlements, and that she (Chief LR/ER),
   would be placing Complainant on absence without leave (AWOL).

9. On September 11, 2019, Chief LR/ER notified Complainant that her previously approved
   leave would be changed from LWOP, to the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), and
   informed her that if her, “Medical condition continued after the expiration of her 480
   hours of FMLA,” she would be charged AWOL.

10. As of September 24, 2019, Acting HR Officer, Assistant HR Officer, Chief LR/ER, and
    HR Officer, have failed to render a decision on Complainant’s request for reasonable
    accommodation.
                                                 3                                     2022000774

The Agency accepted the foregoing claims for investigation. Claims 1 and 10 were accepted as
independent discrete acts of discrimination in addition to being part of Complainant’s overall
hostile work environment claim.

During the investigation, Complainant testified her race is Black and her medical conditions are
bilateral radiculopathy, degenerative joint disease, post-traumatic stress disorder/military sexual
trauma, panic disorder/anxiety, major depressive disorder, and paranoia (all diagnosed in or
before 2016, except paranoia which was diagnosed in 2019). She identified her prior protected
activity as her request for accommodation (although the Agency appears to have identified it as
the instant complaint).

Complainant testified that as a result of her medical conditions, she has work restrictions, which
she identified as limited walking and no prolonged standing, working in an individually assigned
office with minimal noise distractions to assist with concentration, and many times she requires a
cane or rollator to be mobile. However, she testified she is able to perform all work-related duties
with her requested accommodations. Complainant testified that she also has limitations in her
personal life as a result of these medical conditions.

Complainant testified that she initially spoke with Assistant HR Officer about her disability on
February 13, 2019 (although she said they had discussed her back problems around August 2018
during her training). Complainant stated that on February 15, 2019, she emailed Assistant HR
Officer, Human Resources Officer, and LMR Chief requesting reasonable accommodation. She
testified she emailed Assistant HR Officer and Acting LMR Chief on or about June 12, 2019
requesting a reconsideration for reasonable accommodation.

The record reflects that Complainant’s interim supervisor as the time, Acting LMR Chief, is
African American, has a disability, and has previously participated in the EEO process. Her
regular supervisor, former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist, is African American and has a
disability. He was administratively suspended from work for a period during June 2019.
Complainant’s second level supervisor, Assistant HR Officer, is African American. He left the
Agency and was replaced by HR Officer in August 2019. HR Officer is African American.

The record reflects that Complainant initially requested telework on November 20, 2018, when
she emailed HR Manager, Assistant HR Officer, and former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist
stating that she was eligible for telework based on her recent “outstanding” performance
appraisal. There was no mention of any disability, medical condition, or need for accommodation
in this email, and on the Telework Request/Agreement form, Complainant had checked a box
indicating she was not using telework as an accommodation for a qualified temporary disability
or for medical reasons. HR Manager responded on December 4, 2019, telling Complainant to
submit her telework request through her chain of command. That same day, Complainant
emailed her telework package to her then-supervisor, former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist. It is
not clear whether former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist responded.
                                               4                                   2022000774

On February 15, 2019, Complainant had not received a response to her request for telework, so
she again emailed HR Manager, Assistant HR Officer, and former Supervisory ER-LR
Specialist. Complainant stated her in her email that she had spoken to Assistant HR Officer
several times about telework. However, during their latest conversation on February 8, 2019,
Assistant HR Officer indicated he was in possession of her telework request, but she did not
qualify based on current policy. She wrote

       “Additionally, I also shared with [Assistant HR Officer] that I have a condition
       that sometimes prevent me from ambulating I as well as I would like. I asked
       [Assistant HR Officer] if I needed to request [Reasonable Accommodation (RA)]
       because of my condition. While no answer was provided, it was an opportunity
       for management to extend the offer of RA according to VA Handbook 5975.1.
       Therefore, this is my second request for reasonable accommodation. Specifically,
       I am respectfully requesting to telework as an interim accommodation until my
       request is considered for approved and welcome the opportunity to engage in the
       interactive process.”

(Agency MSJ, Ex. 6).

HR Manager responded on February 15, 2019, that she had signed off on Complainant’s
telework request and sent it to the Director with a recommendation for approval. She further
stated she had conferred with former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist, and they had approved her
for telework “as an interim accommodation” while waiting for the Director’s approval. The
record is unclear, but Director signed off on Complainant’s telework request on either February
11 or February 19, 2019.

On June 12, 2019, Acting HR Officer emailed 17 employees, including Complainant, stating that
a decision had been made to terminate their telework agreement in an effort to meet the workload
demands of the medical center. That same day, Complainant emailed her supervisor (Acting
LMR Chief) stating she was officially requesting telework as a reasonable accommodation and
would provide the necessary documentation. She also included HR Manager, former Supervisory
ER-LR Specialist, and Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator on her request. Eight
other employees, including two other Labor and Management Relations specialists, also
requested telework as a reasonable accommodation after the telework termination notice was
sent out. Complainant testified she told Acting LMR Chief that she had previously requested
telework as an RA and she did not feel she should have been grouped with the other HR
Specialists in having her telework agreement terminated.

Complainant testified that on June 17, 2019, Acting LMR Chief confirmed via email that she
would retain her current office space, but he made no mention of Complainant’s other requests
for accommodation. (The record is not clear what requests Complainant had made at that time).
                                              5                                  2022000774

On June 26, 2019, former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist emailed Assistant HR Officer and Local
Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator about the RA requests he received from Complainant
and two other employees. He noted that liberal leave as an interim accommodation would put an
additional burden on his section and asked if he could “offer a temporary ADHOC telework
agreement as an interim accommodation pending the completion of the formal process.”

On July 2, 2019, former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist emailed Assistant HR Officer and Local
Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator stating Complainant had provided him with the
following limitations:

   1. Medications – Prevent Driving
   2. Work in quiet environment
   3. Minimized work distractions that affect concentration, i.e. random people walking up to
      the door, yelling in the HR hallways people walking in on me without warning/notice
   4. Must be able to work alone in a single person office. Must be able to take medication
      w/privacy
   5. Office equipment (Computer/Desk) must be facing the door
   6. Must be able to park in lot closest to the building. Cannot shuttle due to medical
      condition
   7. Cannot attend scheduled meetings on the 1st floor

He also noted that he was approving all leave for Complainant in the interim, “but leave for a
critically needed specialist in ER-LR is a hardship for the section.”

In response, Assistant HR Officer asked whether Complainant’s medication needs were
temporary or permanent, if they were able to ask why she did not want meetings on the first
floor, and when Complainant would be providing her medical documentation. He indicated these
were concerns before making a decision.

On July 3, 2019, Complainant provided Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator with her
medical documentation. Her documentation consisted of a June 24, 2019 letter from her
psychologist (who Complainant had been seeing since 2015 and as recently as June 20, 2019)
stating Complainant was diagnosed with MST-related Post Traumatic Stress disorder, chronic,
and Depression. She noted Complainant was a 100% Service-Connected disabled veteran with
70% for PTSD. The psychologist opined that Complainant should be allowed accommodations
to continue teleworking from home. However, should Complainant come to the office, parking in
Lot A on the green side would minimize the chance of Complainant coming into contact with the
perpetrator of her MST. Additionally, due to Complainant’s PTSD, she would “do best in her
own office due to issues with attention and concentration and in a desk orienting her toward
facing the door.”
                                               6                                   2022000774

Complainant also emailed Assistant HR Officer, former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist, and
Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator on July 3, 2019, stating that when she arrived at
work on July 1, 2019, she found she was sharing an office with a male coworker. (Complainant
later testified the coworker said he had been instructed by Assistant HR Officer to share the
office with Complainant). Complainant’s email indicated this caused her anxiety and inability to
concentrate and focus, as well as pain every time she had to get up when people came to speak to
the coworker about confidential issues. She noted that as a result, she was unable to report for
duty on July 2, 2019. She stated that to date, she was still sharing an office, although she had
provided medical documentation to support her request to work in an office alone. Assistant HR
Officer responded a few hours later directing former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist to ensure
Complainant was in a single desk office assigned to her. He noted he was unaware of the medical
documentation, but he would do his best to accommodate Complainant on an interim basis until
a decision was made. Former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist responded that he would do so.
Complainant testified she ended up leaving work that day after speaking with her medical
provider.

Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator emailed Assistant HR Officer on July 8, 2019,
stating she had reviewed Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request. “The medical
documents do support the limitations of [Complainant’s] disability and she should be allowed to
telework as a permanent accommodation.” She asked Assistant HR Officer to let her know if he
would be approving or disapproving telework as a permanent reasonable accommodation.

On July 8, 2019, Complainant submitted a request for leave without pay (LWOP) from July 8,
2019, at 1:00 pm to July 16, 2019. She stated this was in connection with her health condition,
work-related anxiety, and denial of reasonable accommodation. She attached to this a note from
Texas Behavioral Health stating Complainant had been seen in clinic on July 2, 2019, and due to
her extensive medical condition, it was recommended she be off work from July 5 through July
16, 2019.

Assistant HR Officer responded on July 9, 2019, stating that Complainant’s request for
reasonable accommodation had not been denied; former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist was
working with her to get Complainant’ individual office set up the way she wanted it and a
decision on her request for telework had not yet been made. He indicated that in terms of
Complainant’s parking request, in the interim she could change her tour of duty, which would
provide prime parking. However, he noted he was confused about why she needed parking if she
was taking medication that prevented her from driving. Complainant then asked if her interim
accommodation was approved or disapproved and whether Local Reasonable Accommodation
Coordinator needed any additional documentation to make a determination on Complainant’s
RA request. Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator stated she was just waiting on
management to provide guidance on when a recommendation could be made. Assistant HR
Officer replied that hopefully there would be a determination by close of business on July 10,
2019.
                                                7                                     2022000774

Complainant then took FMLA leave beginning July 11, 2019. On July 17, 2019, Local
Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator contacted Complainant’s medical provider requesting
additional documentation.

Complainant followed up by email on July 22, 2019, asking whether a decision had been made
on her RA request. Assistant HR Officer asked her to call him but since Complainant was out of
the office, she requested he contact her at her personal email.

Complainant’s medical provider provided documentation on or after July 23, 2019, stating that
Complainant suffered from permanent impairments of chronic degenerative disc disease and
bilateral radiculopathy which impacted her ability to sit, walk, or stand for more than 20 minutes.
He stated she should avoid back pain flare ups by parking close to the building, work in a
comfortable environment (cool air), and that if would be ideal if she could work from home.

On August 21, 2019, Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator informed Complainant that
the deciding official for her RA request would change from Assistant HR Officer to HR Officer
as a result of the Agency-wide consolidation of HR to VISN. (This was part of a national effort
to reorganize the Agency’s HR departments).

On August 27, 2019, Complainant and HR Specialist saw Assistant HR Officer in her
neighborhood and they waved to each other. The next day, Complainant emailed him and HR
Officer to say she had been concerned, anxious, and uncomfortable since and felt this was
harassment. On August 29, 2019, Complainant and HR Specialist saw Assistant HR Officer at a
doctor’s office where Complainant was seeking treatment. HR Specialist noted she had
accompanied Complainant to her appointment and when they went to exit, they saw Assistant
HR Officer in the waiting room and alerted staff that they did not feel comfortable exiting with
him there. The staff had them wait in a conference room until Assistant HR Officer was taken
into his new patient appointment. HR Specialist said they could not understand how Assistant
HR Officer came to be a patient there because the location was discreet, not easy to find, and the
sign was not visible. Assistant HR Officer responded a few days later that this was unbelievable,
and he had lived in the neighborhood since 2005. He stated his reasons for driving there were not
Complainant’s business.

Complainant emailed Chief LR/ER about these interactions. Chief LR/ER then directed HR
Officer to look into Complainant’s allegations. HR Officer testified that he looked at Google
Maps and determined Complainant and Assistant HR Officer lived in the same neighborhood
and the mental health counseling location was also located within the same neighborhood, so it
appeared normal for them to frequent similar locations. He stated he provided this information to
Chief LR/ER and VISN HR management and they agreed the parties lived close enough to
potentially meet each other in passing. VISN 16 HR management determined it did not warrant
further review or input.
                                               8                                    2022000774

On September 9, 2019, Complainant contacted Chief LR/ER to request an extension of her
FMLA and asked about using the leave she had instead of LWOP. Chief LR/ER responded that
Complainant had the right to use any available leave in lieu of FMLA-LWOP and she just
needed to inform them of the order in which she wished to use her leave. However, any paid
leave would still count against Complainant’s 480 hours of FMLA leave. Chief LR/ER further
noted that it was her “practice not to grant LWOP outside of a statutory entitlement to that form
of leave. Therefore, once your 480 hours of [FMLA] entitlement is expired, you will be carried
in an AWOL status. If all of the LWOP posted is as a result of FMLA, then your[sic] currently
have 231.5 hours of FMLA entitlement remaining. I will be able to verify this once I obtain your
FMLA approval and conduct a time card audit.”

Complainant responded that she was disappointed in the process and that based on her
experience in HR, she was shocked to be placed in a situation where she had to choose between
work, self-care, and receiving medical treatment at the risk of being AWOL while awaiting her
RA determination. She noted that an effective accommodation could have remedied this and ask
for an update on the decision-making process for her RA request. Chief LR/ER replied on
September 24, 2019, that she was not asking Complainant to choose between work and medical
care or self-care, she was merely advising Complainant of her policy regarding LWOP. She
reminded Complainant about other options for leave including the voluntary leave transfer
program and advancing annual or sick leave. Chief LR/ER stated HR Officer would be
communicating the decision regarding Complainant’s RA request that week.

On October 2, 2019, Complainant emailed Chief LR/ER, HR Officer, and Local Reasonable
Accommodation Coordinator stating she still had not been contacted by anyone in HR
management regarding a decision for her RA request.

The record shows Local Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator transmitted an
Accommodation Request Determination form to HR Officer on October 3, 2019. However, the
form itself is not in the record. Similarly, emails indicate Complainant returned the signed form
on October 11, 2019 noting that she had concerns and issues that were not addressed in the
determination but she did not want to miss the deadline. Her signed form is also not in the
record. Therefore, it is not clear from the record which accommodations were or were not
provided.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.
When the Complainant did not object, the AJ assigned to the case granted the Agency’s July 30,
2021, motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision without a hearing on October
25, 2021. The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.
                                                9                                    2022000774

Complainant filed the instant appeal. On appeal, Complainant, through her representative,
contends that the Agency failed to timely accommodate her disability, and their failure to timely
provide a reasonable accommodation and to correct harassment caused her to incur debt, lose
weight, lose hair, suffer marital difficulties, and suffer extreme emotional distress. Complainant
also contends the Agency subjected her to a hostile work environment based on race and
disability due to the disparate treatment she received as opposed to a white comparator who was
approved for telework earlier, did not have her telework revoked, and who was given a single
office despite being on telework. Complainant testifies she also suffered disability-based
discrimination when she was forced to share an office with a male, forced to take leave due to
the Agency’s failure to accommodate her, and charged her AWOL. 2 She also alleges the Agency
failed to do anything about Assistant HR Officer’s harassing behavior towards her. Lastly,
Complainant contends the Agency retaliated against her due to her protected EEO activity.
Complainant states that after requesting a reasonable accommodation in February 2019, she was
subjected to materially adverse actions when she was threatened with AWOL, forced to choose
between medical self-care and leave-related penalties, and denied her accommodations for a total
of eight months. Complainant argues the Agency’s actions were based solely on pretext.
Complainant states that based on the foregoing, the AJ’s decision was wrongly decided and
requests the Agency’s final decision be reversed, remanded for further processing, and decided
in Complainant’s favor.

The Agency contends on appeal that Complainant’s appeal serves as an attempted and improper
“redo” for having failed entirely to respond to Agency’s Motion for Summary Judgment, despite
having received a clear order from the Judge assigned to hear the matter. The Agency further
argues Complainant cannot show that the complained of hostile work environment was based on
her race, disability or reprisal for the instant complaint. As Complainant’s failure to
accommodate argument, the Agency states, “It is accurate to state that Complainant’s
accommodation was not finalized until October, however, as was discussed in Agency’s Motion
for Summary Judgment, Complainant’s requests and medical documentation were conflicting in
that they did not clearly require telework.” The Agency requests that we uphold the AJ’s
decision.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding
that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision
without a hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed.
R. Civ. P. 56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge
determines no genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards.
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment
motion, the judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to
weighing the evidence. Id. at 249.



2
    None of Complainant’s accepted claims allege that she was charged AWOL.
                                                10                                     2022000774

At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the non-moving party’s evidence and
must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of
fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving party. Celotex v.
Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir.
1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
To successfully oppose a decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of
record that are in dispute or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute. Here,
Complainant does not specifically challenge the AJ's decision to issue a decision without a
hearing. However, in reviewing the record, we do not find it was adequately developed in its
entirety. While we find the record was adequately developed and there were no material facts in
dispute regarding her claims of hostile work environment and disparate treatment (Claims 1 and
10), we find that the record was not adequately developed regarding her claim of failure to
accommodate and there are material facts in dispute as to whether and when Complainant
received effective accommodation.

Disparate Treatment

The Agency accepted Claims 1 and 10 as discrete claims of disparate treatment in addition to
Complainant’s overall hostile work environment claim. A claim of disparate treatment is
examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, she must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438
U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to
persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of
a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).
                                                11                                     2022000774

Here, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Regarding
Claim 1, the Agency states that there was backlog in Human Resources and therefore they
recalled 17 HR Specialists in ER/LR and Recruitment, including Complainant, to meet the
demands of the service and reduce the backlog of proposed actions. Complainant states a white
comparator was not recalled, but the Agency noted this employee’s telework agreement was
originally based on that employee’s need for a reasonable accommodation, whereas
Complainant’s telework application was initially performance-based (her outstanding
performance appraisal entitled her to apply for telework). Regarding Claim 10, the Agency notes
that after telework was revoked in June 2019, nine employees, including Complainant, submitted
requests for reasonable accommodation (implying that this was a lot of requests for them to work
through). The Agency also stated that Complainant’s limitations and medical documentation
were not clear, but in any event, she was provided a single office and leave was granted during
this time period. Further, HR functions were moved to VISN during the period at issue, which
changed the decision-maker on Complainant’s RA request.

Pretext may be shown by direct or indirect evidence of discrimination, either by showing that the
Agency's explanation is not worthy of belief or by showing that a discriminatory motive was
more likely than the given explanation. St. Mary's, 509 U.S at 517 (1993); Burdine, 450 U.S. at
256 (1981). At all times, the burden of persuasion lies with Complainant to show that it was
discriminatory animus that motivated the Agency. See U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711 (1983). To ultimately prevail, a complainant must prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination.
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133 (2000).

Complainant has not met her burden in showing that the Agency's reasons were pretext to mask
discriminatory or retaliatory animus. First, Complainant relies on the white comparator she
named to show pretext, but the record shows this employee originally requested telework as a
reasonable accommodation, whereas Complainant initially requested it based on her
performance, which explains the difference in how their telework issues evolved. Second, the
record is largely devoid of any evidence of discriminatory or retaliatory animus on the part of the
Agency beyond Complainant’s speculative beliefs. Mere assertions or conjecture that an
agency's explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective
belief, however genuine, does not constitute evidence of pretext. Juliet B. v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019); Richardson v. Dep't of Agriculture, EEOC
Petition No. 03A40016 (Dec. 11, 2003). Here, Complainant failed to establish any facts that
would show these actions were motivated by discriminatory animus or retaliation. She argues
that her workload did not change when telework was revoked due to the backlog of proposed HR
actions. However, the question is not whether the agency made the best, or even a sound,
business decision; it is whether the real reason is discrimination. See, e.g., Chavez v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120055246 (Jan. 5, 2007); see also Carson v. Bethlehem Steel Corp.,
82 F.3d 157, 159 (7th Cir. 1982). Without proof of a demonstrably discriminatory motive, the
wisdom of the Agency's business decisions may not be second-guessed. Mendez v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120090593 (May 20, 2010).
                                                 12                                     2022000774

Similarly, while we are not convinced by the Agency’s argument that Complainant’s limitations
and medical documentation were conflicting as a reason for the delay, the record clearly shows
there were numerous issues in HR at the time: backlogs, reorganization, numerous requests for
RA after telework agreements were canceled, and one of Complainant’s supervisors was
administratively suspended. Thus, it appears mismanagement or managerial reasons were the
cause of delay and there is no evidence this was related to Complainant’s race, disability, or
protected EEO activity.

Therefore, we affirm the finding of no discrimination in regard to Claims 1 and 10 as
independent acts of disparate treatment.

Hostile Work Environment

To establish a claim of hostile work environment, Complainant must show that: (1) she belongs
to a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome
verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was
based on her statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of
employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work
environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5)
there is a basis for imputing liability. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir.
1982). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the
conditions of [complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment.” Harris
v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

For a retaliatory harassment claim, the alleged retaliatory actions need not impact a term,
condition, or privilege of employment. See Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway Co. v.
White, 548 U.S. 53 (2006). A complainant need only show that a materially adverse action “well
might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of
discrimination.” Id., 548 U.S. at 68. The Commission's guidance states if the conduct would be
sufficiently material to deter protected activity in the given context, even if it were insufficiently
severe or pervasive to create a hostile work environment, there would be actionable retaliation.
EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, No. 915.004 (August 25, 2016).

While the record does not necessarily establish that all of the alleged incidents occurred as
alleged, even assuming that it did, we find that the totality of the conduct at issue was
insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a hostile work environment. Even if we were to
assume that the alleged conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to create a hostile work
environment, there is no persuasive evidence in the record that discriminatory or retaliatory
animus played a role in any of the Agency's actions. Rather, the evidentiary record reflects that
the alleged incidents were more likely the result of routine supervision, managerial conflicts, and
general workplace disputes and tribulations. Ultimately, managers have the discretion to
determine how to best manage their offices to meet their needs and goals and it is within their
authority to make business decisions. Absent discriminatory animus, the Commission will not
second guess an Agency's business decisions. Burdine, at 249.
                                                13                                     2022000774

Reasonable Accommodation

Claim 10 also gives rise to a claim of failure to accommodate. Under the Commission's
regulations, a federal agency may not discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of
disability and is required to make reasonable accommodations to the known physical and mental
limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability unless the Agency can show that
reasonable accommodation would cause an undue hardship. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o), (p). To
establish that he was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: (1) he is
an individual with a disability, as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) he is a “qualified”
individual with a disability pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed to
provide him with a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance on
Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act,
EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation). An individual with a disability is “qualified” if he or she satisfies the requisite
skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the employment position that
the individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the
essential functions of such position. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).

Our caselaw is clear that that an agency cannot be held liable solely for a failure to engage in the
interactive process. Liability for a failure to engage occurs when the failure to engage in the
interactive process results in the agency's failure to provide reasonable accommodation.
Broussard v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01997106 (Sept. 13, 2002), req. to recon. den.,
EEOC Request No. 05A30114 (Jan. 9, 2003).

We find this matter warrants further development and possible credibility determinations.
Complainant has asserted she had a verbal conversation requesting reasonable accommodation
with Assistant HR Officer sometime prior to February 15, 2019. The record reflects that on
February 15, 2019, she emailed HR Manager, Assistant HR Officer, and former Supervisory ER-
LR Specialist stating that she had a condition that sometimes prevented her from ambulating as
well as she would like, this was her second request for reasonable accommodation, and she was
specifically “requesting to telework as an interim accommodation until my request is considered
for approved and welcome the opportunity to engage in the interactive process.” HR Manager
sent a reply email that day, stating she and former Supervisory ER-LR Specialist were “happy to
approve [Complainant] for telework as an interim accommodation while we are pending the
Director’s response.” A reasonable accommodation request need not be in writing or use the
magic words of “reasonable accommodation.” See Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation, EEOC No. 915.002 at Question 3 (Oct. 17, 2002). The employee need only
inform the Agency that he needs an adjustment or change at work for a reason related to a
medical condition. See Triplett-Graham v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A44720 (Feb,
24, 2006). Regardless, this use of “interim accommodation” shows HR Manager understood
Complainant to be making a request for reasonable accommodation at that time. However, the
Agency did not move forward with the interactive process until June 2019.
                                               14                                    2022000774

The Agency seems to argue this is because Complainant’s telework paperwork did not state it
was for reasonable accommodation, As a result of this failure to engage in the interactive process
beginning in February 2019, it appears the Agency failed to effectively accommodate
Complainant between the time her telework was revoked in June 2019 and the time she was
granted effective reasonable accommodations. It appears from the Agency’s argument regarding
Complainant’s comparator that if Complainant’s request for telework as a reasonable
accommodation was considered in February 2019, her telework agreement may not have been
revoked in June 2019. However, since the record does not contain the ultimate determination on
Complainant’s request for RA, information on the damages Complainant suffered as a result of
the Agency’s failure to engage in the interactive process in February 2019, Complainant’s leave
records, and/or other information about whether and when Complainant was ultimately effective
accommodated by the Agency, we find this claim was not appropriate for summary judgment
and requires a supplemental investigation.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency's final order implementing the AJ's
decision without a hearing finding no discrimination regarding Complainant’s claim of hostile
work environment or her claims of disparate treatment regarding Claims 1 and 10. However, we
REMAND the issue of reasonable accommodation and failure to accommodate to the Agency for
further processing in accordance with the ORDER below.

                                            ORDER

Within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of this order, the Agency shall conduct and complete a
supplemental investigation consistent with the requirements of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b), EEO
MD-110, Chapter 6 and the guidance in this decision. The supplemental investigation shall
include, but is not limited to: why the Agency did not begin the interactive process in February
2019, when Complainant was provided with both interim and permanent reasonable
accommodations and the specifics of those offers, what interim accommodations were used by
Complainant and when, when Complainant accepted or rejected interim and permanent offers or
reasonable accommodations, and the damages Complainant contends she suffered as a result of
any failure to accommodate.

Upon completion of the supplemental investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant
with a copy of the supplemental record and shall again provide him with a right to a hearing or
immediate final agency decision as provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f). If Complainant elects
an immediate final agency decision, that decision shall be issued within sixty (60) calendar days
of receipt of the request for the decision or the expiration of the request period.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order.
                                                15                                    2022000774

EEOC will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not making
reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include evidence that the directed action has been taken.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               16                                   2022000774

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 17                                     2022000774

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 14, 2023
Date
