             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Lloyd E., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Antony Blinken,
                                          Secretary,
                                      Department of State,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021004009

                                   Agency No. DOS-0339-20

                                           DECISION

On July 8, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 9, 2021 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                                        BACKGROUND

Complainant worked as a Senior Cyber Security Specialist, GS-2210-14, at the Agency’s
Headquarters in Washington, D.C. His position was located within the Bureau of Information
Resources Management, Office of Policy, Liaison, and Training (OPLT). On October 30, 2020,
Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint in which he alleged that the Agency discriminated
against him and subjected him to a hostile work environment on the basis of disability (disabled
veteran/70 percent disability rating) characterized by, but not limited to, inappropriate comments
and false accusations.

Complainant summarized his claim as follows:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2021004009

       My [S]upervisor, * * * routinely demeans me and my work. She verbally attacks
       and demeans me through her disparaging insults on my integrity and character. I
       was either on [a]nnual [l]eave or recovering from COVID-19 the whole month of
       July, except for half-day on the 13th and in the full day on the 31st. [The Supervisor]
       posted mid-year review comments to GEMS for me on 07/06, while I was on AL,
       stating I avoided responding to her and again on 09/11 accusing me of being
       “evasive” and “combative.” The toxic environment [the Supervisor] fosters has
       caused an undue toll on my mental and physical health that affects my sleep and
       family life.

IR 48. In addition, Complainant averred that his Supervisor publicly embarrassed him at an OPLT
meeting on May 2, 2019 by forcing him to return to his office to retrieve a draft document. IR 56-
57. Next, he averred that on September 4, 2019, his Supervisor falsely accused him in connection
with a policy document that he was working on. IR 58-59, 103-04, 110. Further, on November
14, 2019, the Supervisor issued Complainant a letter of admonishment for raising his voice to her
and accusing her of denying his leave request. IR 97-99, 111. In what appears to be a
contemporaneously created log, he listed various other incidents that allegedly occurred between
September 2019 and January 22, 2020. IR 58, 76-84, 94-96.

At the conclusion of the ensuing investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of
the investigative report and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. On April 15, 2021, Complainant requested a final
agency decision. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In that decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant
failed to prove that Agency management subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Hostile Work Environment

To prevail on a claim of discriminatory harassment, Complainant would have to show that: (1) he
belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) he was subjected to harassment in the form of
unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on his statutorily protected classes; (4) the harassment affected a term or
condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
                                                 3                                      2021004009

work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5)
there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d
897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or pervasive to
alter the conditions of [complainant's] employment and create an abusive working environment.”
Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993).

We shall assume without deciding for purposes of this decision that Complainant is an individual
with a disability. We find that he satisfied the first two prongs of the Henson test. The conduct
to which he was allegedly subjected, being publicly demeaned, belittled, and falsely accused by
his Supervisor was certainly unwelcome from his own, subjective viewpoint.                   The
antidiscrimination statutes that the Commission enforces are not civility codes, however. Rather,
they forbid “only behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim's
employment.” Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998).

To ultimately prevail on his claim of discriminatory harassment, Complainant must prove that he
was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in
Complainant's position would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must
also show that the conduct in question was motivated by unlawful considerations of his disability.
Indicators of discriminatory motive include discriminatory statements or past personal treatment
attributable to those responsible for the personnel action that led to the filing of the complaint,
unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard procedures without explanation
or justification, or inadequately explained inconsistencies in the evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12, 2015). Only if Complainant
establishes both of these elements, motive and hostility, can the question of Agency liability for
discriminatory harassment present itself.

When asked why he believed that his disability was a factor as related to his harassment claim,
Complainant repeated his assertion that the Supervisor routinely insulted the quality of his work,
his integrity, and his character by making unwarranted accusations. IR 52, 62, 64. One of his
colleagues, a Cyber Engineer who was present at the May 2, 2019 meeting, reported that he had
observed the Supervisor using a demeaning tone and language when addressing Complainant, but
did not claim that the Supervisor’s behavior was due to discrimination. IR 171-72. Another
colleague, a Computer Scientist, averred that he saw the Supervisor “berate, gaslight, and passively
threaten” Complainant and that the Supervisor acted the same way toward each of the four White
male members of her staff. IR 174-77. The Computer Scientist further stated:

       My only additional information is that there are numerous additional complaints of
       harassment, discrimination [emphasis added], bullying, and hostile work
       environment that have been previously reported with some currently under
       investigation against the [S]upervisor. I do not have relevant documents to support
       because the staff only spoke of events instead of digital communication out of fear
       of retaliation of the [S]upervisor.
                                                  4                                     2021004009

IR 177. The Supervisor, the Office Director, who was Complainant’s second-line supervisor, and
the Deputy Chief Information Officer, who was Complainant’s third-line supervisor, all averred
that they were unaware that Complainant had a disability. IR 106-07, 146-47, 159. The Supervisor
stated that she never knowingly or intentionally taunted, made disparaging comments about, or
falsely accused Complainant. IR 108. As to the OPLT meeting held on May 2, 2019, the
Supervisor stated that she had no idea that Complainant would take over 15 minutes to retrieve the
document in question and that the draft that Complainant brought back to the meeting was not in
the prescribed format and did not include any of the recommended changes. IR 109. Concerning
the false accusation allegation, Complainant had again presented a draft that contained numerous
errors in grammar, spelling, and substantive content. IR 110-11. Regarding the letter of
admonishment, the Supervisor reported that Complainant became belligerent and aggressive when
she tried to raise performance issues with him. IR 110-11.

Aside from Complainant’s own assertions and what appears to be his colleague’s generalized
allegations, Complainant has presented no other documentary or testimonial evidence tending to
show that the Supervisor harbored unlawful considerations of Complainant’s disability in
connection with any of the incidents described in his complaint. Indeed, neither the Cyber
Engineer nor the Computer Scientist mentioned anything about Complainant having a disability.
Complainant himself has presented neither affidavits, declarations, or statements from witnesses
other than himself nor documents which contradict or undercut the sworn testimony of the
Supervisor, the Office Director, or the Deputy that they were unaware that Complainant had a
disability. Complainant has likewise not presented any documentary or testimonial evidence that
would cause us to question the truthfulness of these management officials on that point. After
reviewing the evidentiary record in its entirety, we find that it is not sufficient for Complainant to
show that the conduct at issue was based on his protected class.

The Commission has repeatedly stated that allegations describing common workplace
occurrences, such as routine work assignments, instructions, and admonishments, do not rise to
the level of hostility necessary to constitute harassment. Tasia C. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 2021001165 (Jan. 18, 2022). The matters at issue in Complainant’s discriminatory
harassment claim include his Supervisor’s comments on his mid-year review, the Supervisor
directing him to retrieve a draft policy document from his office at the team meeting, and the
Supervisor’s efforts to provide Complainant with feedback concerning his policy document drafts.
IR 77-82, 108-11. All of these incidents involved routine assignments and instructions and none
of these incidents, either singly or collectively, was severe or pervasive enough to rise to the level
of harassment. Accordingly, we find that Complainant was not subjected to a discriminatory
hostile work environment as alleged.

                                          CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision.
                                                 5                                      2021004009

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                   6                                      2021004009

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 6, 2022
Date
