              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                             Art B., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                     Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                           Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                           (Federal Emergency Management Agency),
                                            Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2022001525

                                 Hearing No. 550-2021-00353X

                               Agency No. HS-FEMA-02194-2020

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s December 28, 2021 final
decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint claiming employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967
(ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant was an applicant for Agency employment.

On October 10, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him based on race (Italian/American), sex (male), religion (Christian), color
(White), disability, age, and in reprisal for prior protected activity.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2022001525

By letter dated April 5, 2021, the Agency accepted some claims for investigation. The Agency
accepted the following claims:

          1.     On April 29, 2020, Complainant was not selected for the position of Emergency
                 Management Specialist, Vacancy Announcement No. FEMA-20-TNL-336388-
                 CORE Recovery;

          2.      On July 6, 2020, Complainant was informed that he had not been selected for the
                 position of Emergency Management Specialist, Vacancy Announcement No.
                 FEMA-19-KSR-323209-CORE; and

          3.     On March 4, 2020, Complainant was not selected for the position of Emergency
                 Management Specialist, Vacancy Announcement No. FEMA-20-TNL-349749,
                 located in Bothwell, Washington.

However, the Agency dismissed the following claims:

          4.      In or around January 2020, Complainant became aware that he was misinformed
                 when he was advised that an EEO representative would be present during his July
                 12, 2017 interview for the Grants Management Specialist position. 2

          5.      On unspecified dates in July and August 2017, Complainant was advised not to
                 discuss an internal investigation, and management failed to follow up with him;

          6.     On unspecified dates in May, June, and July 2018, the Office of Special Counsel
                 failed to follow up with Complainant regarding a complaint filed.

          7.     On unspecified dates in 2017 and 2018, management delayed Complainant’s
                 request for reasonable accommodation;

          8.     On August 15, 2018, Complainant was constructively discharged when he resigned
                 from his position with the Agency.

The Agency dismissed claims (5)-(8) for untimely EEO Counselor contact. The Agency reasoned
that Complainant did not initiate EEO contact on these matters until May 14, 2020 beyond the
applicable time limit.3 The also dismissed claim (6) for failure to state a claim reasoning that this
was a collateral attack on another forum.




2
    The Agency previously accepted this claim via letter dated December 17, 2020.
3
    The Agency initially dismissed claims (5)-(8) via letter to Complainant dated December 17, 2020.
                                               3                                       2022001525

The Agency dismissed claim (4) for alleging the same matter as in a prior complaint. The Agency
reasoned that “[o]n August 18, 2017, [Complainant] filed informal EEO complaint HS-FEMA-
02357-2017 with this office alleging discrimination with regard to your July 2017 interview and
subsequent non-selection under Job Announcement No. FEMA-17-TC-166159-DE. [He]
withdrew that complaint on August 31, 2017. Even though [he] finds fault with who attended [his]
interview, the gist of the claim is identical to the claim in [his] prior case…”

The Agency also dismissed claim (4) for untimely EEO Counselor contact. The Agency reasoned
Complainant should have reasonably suspected discrimination in July 2017, when he was informed
of his non-selection. Complainant, however, did not initiate EEO contact until May 14, 2020. The
Agency further stated that “[Complainant] did suspect discrimination and filed an informal EEO
complaint on August 18, 2017 and withdrew that complaint.”

After an investigation of the accepted claims, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of
the report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.
On September 17, 2021, Complainant filed a Motion to Reinstate Dismissed Claims and Amend
His Complaint. On October 12, 2021, the Agency filed a Motion to Dismiss in Part and Opposition
to Complainant’s Motion to Reinstate Dismissed Claims and to Amend His Complaint (Agency’s
Motion). In an email dated November 3, 2021 to the AJ, Complainant withdrew his hearing
request and requested a final agency decision. By Order dated November 5, 2021, the AJ
remanded the matter to the Agency for a final decision based on Complainant’s request.

The Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In its final decision, the Agency found that it had articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons
for Complainant’s non-selection regarding claim (1). The panel unanimously found that the
selectee for this position was the best qualified candidate. In addition, the Agency set forth that it
removed Complainant from consideration for this position based on a negative reference received
from Complainant’s former co-worker during his prior employment with the Agency. 4 The
Agency further found that Complainant failed to establish that the Agency’s articulated reasons
for his non-selection were pretext for retaliation and/or discrimination.

Regarding claim (2), the Agency found that it articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
Complainant’s non-selection. The Agency stated that Complainant interviewed well, but that the
Agency received information that Complainant had previously worked for the Hawaii Emergency
Management Agency (HI-EMA) and quit after approximately three days. The Agency found that
given Complainant’s abrupt departure from HI-EMA, management decided to re-post the position
to obtain a broader pool of qualified candidates. The Agency further found that Complainant failed
to establish that the Agency’s articulated reasons were pretext for discrimination and/or retaliation.



4
 Complainant previously worked for the Agency from 2014 until his resignation on August 15,
2018, in Bothwell, Washington.
                                              4                                      2022001525

The Agency dismissed the basis of reprisal reasoning that Complainant alleged that his reprisal
claim dealt solely with his fraud complaints to the Office of Special Counsel (OSC). The Agency
reasoned that this matter is outside of EEOC’s purview. Final decision at 6.

In its final decision, the Agency also dismissed claims (3)-(8), for untimely EEO Counselor
contact.

Regarding claim (4), the Agency also dismissed this matter for Complainant alleging the same
claim in a prior EEO case. The Agency reasoned that Complainant initially raised this matter in
an informal complaint, which he subsequently withdrew. Final decision at 7-8.

Regarding claim (6), the Agency also dismissed this matter for failure to state a claim reasoning
that it was a collateral attack on the OSC process. Final decision at 11.

Finally, while this matter was before an EEOC AJ, Complainant proposed for the instant complaint
to be amended with the following claim:

       9.       On April 25, 2021, OER retaliated against Complainant when it dismissed claim
               (4) after Complainant asked OER to justify its request for a 90 day extension of the
               formal complaint period.

The Agency, in its final decision, dismissed this matter reasoning that it was a spin-off complaint
and not an actionable separate claim. Final decision at 11-12.

Complainant filed the instant appeal. Regarding claim (1), Complainant asserts that a former co-
worker provided a negative reference with false information due to his religion. Complainant also
asserts that the ROI is not adequate. Regarding claim (2), Complainant asserts that there are some
discrepancies in the testimony of an Agency official provided to the EEO Counselor and the
testimony she provided to the EEO Investigator.

In response, the Agency requests that we affirm its final decision.

                                           ANALYSIS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).
                                               5                                      2022001525

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs
v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S.
502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally consists
of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases. Where the
agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action at issue, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Dep’t of Transportation, EEOC Request No.
05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Dep’t of Health and Human Services, EEOC Request No.
05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May
31, 1990).

Claim (1)- Vacancy Announcement No. FEMA-20-TNL-336388-CORE Recovery

The record contains a declaration under penalty of perjury from the Director, Hawaii Long Term
Recovery Office. The Director of Long-Term Recovery served on the interview panel. She stated
that the panel was unanimous in agreeing that the selectee was the best qualified candidate. Report
of Investigation (ROI) at 251. Specifically, she stated “[the selectee’s] experience directly
supporting the government of Puerto Rico was seen as an asset which would allow him to better
understand, relate to and support our state territorial and local partners. We believed that his
experience also provided [the selectee] knowledge of island communities and their unique
challenges in implementing the Public Assistance program.” 5 Id. She further asserted that the
selectee received an exemplary reference. ROI at 252.

The Director, Long Term Recovery stated that she initially included Complainant as one of the
alternates for the position until she received a negative reference from an Agency employee with
Region 10. ROI at 252. The record contains a copy of this reference. Therein, the Region 10
Branch Chief stated “no, cannot recommend. Always complaining, always trying to pass work to
others…” ROI at 264. The record contains a declaration from the Region 10 Branch Chief.
Therein, she asserts that she and Complainant were previously co—workers.


5
 The selecting official for this position noted that one of the vacancies for this announcement was
not filled due to a realignment with the Oakland Office. ROI at 294.
                                              6                                      2022001525

She states that, in her reference, she set forth that Complainant was not a good co-worker.
Specifically, the Branch Chief stated “[Complainant] was uncooperative, defensive, and
undependable because you could not rely on him to get something done.” ROI at 454.

Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the Agency’s articulated
reasons for his non-selection were pretext for discrimination. While Complainant asserts that he
asked the Agency to inform him prior to it checking his references and that he did not provide the
Agency with the name of his former co-worker, this alone does not establish pretext. To the extent
that Complainant asserts that his former co-worker provided a negative reference due to his
religion, we find this to be merely speculation and Complainant has not established that the
Agency’s reasons for his non-selection were pretext for discrimination. Moreover, the record is
devoid of evidence that the former co-worker’s reference was based on Complainant’s protected
classes.

Claim (2)- Vacancy Announcement No. FEMA-19-KSR-323209-CORE

The Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s non-selection
regarding claim (2). The Director, Long Term Recovery stated that Complainant interviewed for
this position. She stated that Complainant mentioned that he worked for HI-EMA for about three
days and quit due to mold allergies. ROI at 255.

The record contains a declaration from an Agency official with HI-EMA. Therein, she asserts that
she spoke with the Agency’s Director, Long-Term Recovery regarding Complainant. ROI at 465.
She stated that Complainant stayed for less than a week before he quit. She further asserted that
the Administrator of HI-EMA felt Complainant did not give HI-EMA time to properly address and
fix the problem. ROI at 470. The record also contains a declaration from the Administrator of HI-
EMA during the relevant period. Therein, the Administrator stated that Complainant had only
worked for HI-EMA for a short period, and he wished Complainant worked with them to resolve
the issue before leaving. ROI at 490. The Director, Long Term Recovery asserted that she
informed the selecting official for the position in question of HI-EMA Administrator’s concerns
regarding Complainant’s departure and that she and the selecting official discussed reposting the
position for a larger applicant pool. ROI at 256.

Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency’s articulated
reason for his non-selection was pretext for discrimination. To the extent that Complainant asserts
that an Agency’s official’s testimony to the EEO Counselor contains discrepancies compared to
her testimony to the EEO Investigator, we find that any differences do not establish, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the Agency’s reasons were pretext for discrimination. While
Complainant asserts that some of the Agency witnesses were not credible, we note that
Complainant withdrew his hearing request and requested a final agency decision. As a result of
Complainant’s decision not to elect a hearing before an AJ, we do not have the benefit of an AJ’s
credibility determinations or an AJ overseeing the further development of the record. Complainant
bears the burden to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was subjected to
discrimination, Complainant has not met that burden.
                                              7                                      2022001525

Dismissal of Claims (3)-(8)

Regarding claim (3), Complainant sets forth in his brief that he no longer wishes to pursue this
claim; thus we decline to address this claim further herein. Complainant’s Brief at 2.

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1) requires that complaints of discrimination should
be brought to the attention of the Equal Employment Opportunity Counselor within forty-five (45)
days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel action,
within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of the action. The Commission has adopted a
"reasonable suspicion" standard (as opposed to a "supportive facts" standard) to determine when
the forty-five (45) day limitation period is triggered. See Howard v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC
Request No. 05970852 (Feb. 11, 1999). Thus, the time limitation is not triggered until a
complainant reasonably suspects discrimination, but before all the facts that support a charge of
discrimination have become apparent.

EEOC Regulations provide that the agency or the Commission shall extend the time limits when
the individual shows that he was not notified of the time limits and was not otherwise aware of
them, that he did not know and reasonably should not have known that the discriminatory matter
or personnel action occurred, that despite due diligence he was prevented by circumstances beyond
his control from contacting the Counselor within the time limits, or for other reasons considered
sufficient by the agency or the Commission.

The Agency properly dismissed claims (4)-(8) for untimely EEO Counselor contact. The record
reflects that Complainant initiated EEO contact on May 14, 2020. Agency’s Motion Exhibit (Ex.)
D, ROI at 44. Thus, Complainant initiated EEO contact more than 45 days from the date of the
alleged discriminatory incidents set forth in claims (4)-(8). Complainant asserts that his initial
EEO contact should be January 2020, because he emailed the Agency’s EEO Office on that date
requesting his file because he believed it contained discriminatory or negative information.
However, we disagree. The record contains a copy of an email from Complainant to the Agency’s
EEO Office dated January 22, 2020. Therein, Complainant stated “Can you provide me the contact
person that can assist me with providing me a copy of my employee file?” Agency’s Motion Ex.
C. We find this email insufficient to constitute an initiation of the EEO process. The record
contains another email from Complainant dated May 14, 2020 to the Agency’s EEO Office.
Therein, Complainant stated “I would like to request assistance from a counselor as I am seeking
to file a complaint.” Agency’s Motion Ex. D. Based on the foregoing, we find that Complainant
initiated EEO contact on May 14, 2020, and not in January 2020.

Complainant asserts that these claims are part of one hostile work environment which include the
accepted claims, claims (1) and (2). However, we concur with the Agency that claims (4)-(8) are
not sufficiently connected to the accepted claims to constitute one ongoing hostile work
environment claim. The Agency, in its final decision, reasoned “even when viewed together, none
of the hiring officials in Hawaii, under timely claims (1) and (2) were involved in actions taken by
management officials in Bothwell Washington.” Final decision at 9.
                                               8                                      2022001525

In addition, claim (8) involved Complainant’s constructive discharge from the Agency in 2018,
and the alleged discriminatory incidents in accepted claims (1) and (2) occurred in 2020.
Moreover, we find that Complainant failed to provide sufficient justification to extend the
applicable time limit for claims (4)-(8).

Regarding claim (9), we find that Complainant is alleging dissatisfaction with the processing of
the instant complaint when the Agency dismissed claim (4), after previously accepting it. This
matter constitutes a separate claim but rather pertains to dissatisfaction with the processing of
claim (4). As set forth above, we found that the Agency’s dismissal of claim (4) for untimely EEO
Counselor contact was proper.

Accordingly, for the reasons set forth herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s decision finding no
discrimination regarding claims (1) and (2) and dismissing the remainder of the complaint. 6

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                 RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx




6
  Because we affirm the Agency’s final decision for the reasons set forth herein, we need not
address the Agency’s alternate grounds for dismissal.
                                                9                                        2022001525

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration
of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service
is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result
in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.


                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                               10                                       2022001525

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 15, 2023
Date
