             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Hilda A., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                   Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                               (Customs and Border Protection),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021004259

                               Agency No. HS-CBP-00729-2020

                                          DECISION

On July 15, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 11, 2021, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the matter for
a supplemental investigation.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Customs and
Border Protection (CBP) Officer, GS-1895-12, at the Agency’s El Paso Port of Entry (POE), El
Paso Field Office, Office of Field Operations in El Paso, Texas.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                   2021004259

On April 13, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her
to a hostile work environment and discriminated against her on the bases of sex (female),
disability (physical: cervical myelopathy, cervical fusion with limited neck movement) and age
(56) when:

       1.     from September 8, 2019, to January of 2020, the Supervisory CBP Officer
              (Supervisor 1) assigned Complainant regular cashier duties in addition to issuing
              I-94s, despite the fact Complainant was on Light Duty;

       2.     in September of 2019, Supervisor 1 told the Program Manager that she did not
              want to work with Complainant in Passport Control Secondary because
              Complainant was on Light Duty and did not have a weapon.

       3.     on September 13, 2019, Supervisor 1 told Complainant that she did not want to
              work with her, and that Complainant was a liability due to her health issues;

       4.     from October 2019 to February 2020, on approximately 10 to 15 occasions, the
              Supervisor interrupted Complainant talking with other employees and asked them
              to stop talking;

       5.     on December 24, 2019, Supervisor 1 assigned Complainant passport control
              duties, despite the fact Complainant was on Light Duty. When Complainant
              explained she could help but could not perform regular duties for a full eight
              hours, the Supervisor replied "it is what it is;"

       6.     on December 24, 2019, in front of the public, Supervisor 1 yelled at Complainant
              to start issuing permits, stating Complainant does not want to do her job. Then,
              Supervisor 1 turned to the members of the public and advised them they could file
              a complaint against Complainant for not attending to them.

       7.     on January 1 and January 3, 2020, Supervisor 1 yelled at Complainant, accused
              her of doing a pat down and processing a case without a weapon while
              Complainant was on Light Duty, and accused her of abusing her light duty
              schedule;

       8.     on January 2, 2020, Supervisor 1 accused Complainant of making false statements
              in a memorandum;

       9.     on January 3, 2020, Supervisor 1 commented that Complainant did not want to
              work;

       10.    on January 3, 2020, after Supervisor 1 called the Chief regarding Complainant's
              schedule, Complainant's Light Duty shift was changed from the 10:00 p.m. -6:00
                                              3                                    2021004259

              a.m. shift to the midnight-8 a.m. shift for two days before Complainant returned
              to full duty on her regular shift;

       11.    on January 6, 2020, Supervisor 1 yelled at Complainant over the phone, accusing
              her of working the wrong schedule and of not wanting to perform her duties;

       12.    on January 15 and 16, 2020, Supervisor 1 raised her tone, claimed Complainant
              did not want to do her job, threatened to give Complainant a verbal warning and
              reprimand for not taking over another officer's duties, and threatened to write
              Complainant up for insubordination and disobeying a direct order;

       13.    on January 16, 2020, when Complainant asked another Supervisory CBP Officer
              (Supervisor 2) to initial an assignment for her, he said "I'm not signing shit for
              you." Later, after Complainant refused to perform cashier duties, Supervisor 2
              said he did not need a nonproductive worthless person there, and told her to go to
              the back of the office;

       14.    on January 31, 2020, Supervisor 1 approached Complainant in a threatening voice
              and demanded she perform cashier duties when three other officers were
              available. After Supervisor 1 called Supervisor 2, Supervisor 2 reassigned
              Complainant to detention log officer duties, raised his voice and demanded
              Complainant leave the work area and work from a different location. When
              Complainant did not, Supervisor 2 told Complainant to go home on administrative
              leave. Complainant did not go home; and

       15.    on February 6, 2020, Complainant received a Weingarten notice, was informed
              she was accused by Supervisor 1 and Supervisor 2 of not wanting to work,
              disobedience, neglecting duties and disobeying an order, and was asked to
              provide a written statement to the Chief.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination as alleged. The Agency found that Complainant failed to show that she was
subjected to disparate treatment.
                                                 4                                     2021004259

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant asserts that the Agency does not have a Standard Operating Procedure
when it comes to light duty matters. Complainant asserts that the Agency knowingly
discriminated against her based on her medical condition despite her submission of medical
documentation demonstrating that she required a reasonable accommodation. Instead of
assistance, Complainant notes that she was informed that she was a liability due to her condition.
Complainant also states that despite management’s assertion that she was placed in Passport
Control Secondary as a form of light duty, it was insufficient to meet her needs. Complainant
asserts that she was ultimately forced to return to work in full duty status in fear that the Agency
would attempt to terminate her. However, she asserts that the harassment continued, and that the
Agency simply ignored her situation.

In response, the Agency requests that the Commission affirm its final decision.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Upon review, we find that Complainant’s allegations concern her claims that she was treated
differently based on her disability and age, as well as not being provided with the appropriate
reasonable accommodation. The Agency, however, failed to identify or address Complainant’s
claim of denial of reasonable accommodation. Furthermore, Complainant has alleged that
because she engaged in protected activity in the form of requesting a reasonable accommodation,
she has been subjected to retaliatory harassment.

Since the Agency failed to properly identify Complainant’s claims, Complainant’s allegations
were not sufficiently investigated to permit the Commission to render a decision on the merits of
her complaint. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires that the Agency develop an
impartial and appropriate factual record. Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (MD 110), Ch. 6, § I (Aug. 5, 2015). An appropriate factual record is one
that allows a reasonable factfinder to draw conclusions as to whether discrimination
occurred. Id. An investigator must be thorough. “This means identifying and obtaining all
relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome.” MD 110, Ch. 6,
§ V.D. “To ensure a balanced record, it is necessary only to exhaust those sources likely to
support the complainant and the respondent.
                                                 5                                     2021004259

An investigation conducted in this manner might reveal that there is ample evidence to support
the complainant's claims and no evidence to support the agency's version of the facts,
or vice versa. The best type of investigations allows for complainants to provide rebuttal
evidence with sufficient time for the investigator to address any issues raised within the
regulatory time frames.” Id.

Here, the Agency failed to identify Complainant’s claim of denial of reasonable accommodation.
The record thus lacks the process by which Complainant was placed on “light duty”. This
includes how she was assigned light duty (claim 1); and what and how the duties were assigned
to her (claim 5-7, 12-14). An adequate investigation would have included affidavits from
relevant individuals involved in the light duty interactive process. For example, there are no
statements from the Supervisory Mission Support Specialist, who provided Complainant with a
renewal of her temporary light duty status and also allegedly responsible for changing
Complainant’s shift hours. There are also no statements from the two Administrative Supervisors
who allegedly corrected Complainant’s light duty hours schedule. Additionally, Complainant
asserted that she felt targeted by a specific individual for requesting light duty, this individual
was identified by Complainant but not interviewed.

Additionally, once on light duty, Complainant repeatedly asserted that she was provided with
inappropriate assignments. We note that there are no affidavits from any relevant individuals
responsible for determining Complainant’s light duty assignments. Instead, management
repeatedly referred to the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) when discussing
Complainant’s light duty assignments. Yet, the Agency failed to provide a copy of the relevant
portion of the CBA.

Furthermore, since the Agency failed to identify Complainant’s claim of denial of reasonable
accommodation, the Agency similarly failed to identify Complainant’s claim of retaliatory
harassment for requesting reasonable accommodation. 2 For example, Complainant asserted that
because of her request for a reasonable accommodation, she was called an undesirable employee
(claim 2); she was told that she was a liability due to her health issues (claim 3); she was accused
of abusing her light duty schedule (claim 7); and had her light duty hours changed (claims 10 and
11). We note that Complainant listed four witnesses that could attest to the retaliatory
harassment, but none were interviewed. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 142-143.




2
  We note that a request for reasonable accommodation of a disability constitutes protected
activity under the Rehabilitation Act, and therefore retaliation for such requests is unlawful. See
EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice Number 915.004,
at Example 9 (Aug. 25, 2016) citing Solomon v. Vilsack, 763 F.3d 1, 15 n.6 (D.C. Cir. 2014)
(citing rulings from every federal judicial circuit holding that requests for reasonable
accommodation are protected activity).
                                                6                                    2021004259

Based on the foregoing, we find the investigative record is inadequate and needs to be
supplemented so that a determination on the merits of Complainant's complaint can be
made. See generally, Stewart v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Request No. 0520070124 (Nov.
14, 2011) (inadequate investigation); O'Neill v. Dep't of State, EEOC Appeal No. 0120083597
(Jan. 15, 2009) (inadequate investigation).

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s decision and REMAND the matter for supplemental
investigation and further processing in accordance with the ORDER set forth below.

                                            ORDER

  I.   Within ninety (90) days of receipt of this order, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
       investigation, to include the following:

       A. Affidavits from all relevant individuals, including but not limited to those listed
          below. If the following identified individuals fail to provide affidavits, then an
          explanation why.

              1. Two Supervisory Mission Support Specialists referenced by Supervisor 1 but
                 not interviewed. Both should be interviewed about their role in the light duty
                 process. The names of these individuals can be located in the ROI at 285
                 under the response to question 45. See also ROI at 125.

              2. Complainant asserted that she was targeted by a specific individual for
                 requesting light duty, this individual was identified by Complainant but not
                 interviewed and can be found in the ROI at 26.

              3. Interviews with Complainant’s four listed witnesses found in the ROI at 143.

       B. The investigation shall address the interactive process including, how light duty status
          is determined; who was involved in the process; documents regarding how the
          individualized assessment was conducted; how light duty hours are determined; and
          how assignments are determined and assigned.

       C. A copy of the CBA as referenced by management.

       D. The Agency’s arguments and evidence that reasonable accommodation would impose
          an undue hardship.
                                                7                                     2021004259

 II.   Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant with a
       copy of the supplemental record and findings and shall notify Complainant of the
       opportunity to provide any rebuttal arguments or evidence within fifteen (15) calendar
       days. Following the rebuttal opportunity, the Agency shall, within thirty (30) calendar
       days, issue a final decision including appeal rights.

As provided in the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision,” the
Agency must send to the Compliance Officer: 1) a copy of the Agency’s letter of
acknowledgment to Complainant, 2) a copy of the Agency’s notice that transmits the
investigative file, and 3) a copy of the complainant’s rebuttal or a statement from the Agency
that it did not receive a response from Complainant by the end of the rebuttal period.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency
                                                8                                    2021004259

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 9                                      2021004259

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 6, 2023
Date
