             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Wayne C., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                          Secretary,
                                    Department of Defense
                              (Defense Threat Reduction Agency),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022004938

                                  Agency No. DTRA-22-006

                                          DECISION

On September 17, 2022, Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission) from an August 24, 2022 final Agency
decision (FAD) dismissing his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation
Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant was employed by a staffing firm serving the Agency as
a Chemical/Biological Instructor Technician at the Agency’s Nuclear Enterprise Directorate,
Contingency Operations Department, European Command Tech Support Division in Stuttgart,
Germany.

On February 14, 2022, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
him to discrimination:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                       2022004938

      Based on religion (Christianity) and reprisal for EEO activity when:

      1. On October 15 and 21, 2021, the Agency Chief of the European Command Tech
         Support Division (“Agency Chief”) warned him that if he continued to refuse a
         COVID-19 vaccination, he would end up being fired, even with a request for an
         exemption from vaccination as a religious accommodation.

      Based on reprisal and in violation of Rehabilitation Act confidentiality requirements
      when:

      2. In October 2021, the Agency and on November 3 and 15, 2021, his staffing firm
         directed he complete the federal government’s Contractor Personnel and
         Certification of Vaccination form DD 3150 (“attestation”) despite his objection
         this would violate his medical privacy in contravention of the Rehabilitation Act.

     Based on religion and reprisal when:

      3. His staffing firm would not provide him its religious exemption form, which it
         required to process a request for religious accommodation, unless he first
         completed the above attestation. The attestation form asked that one of four fields
         be chosen - “I am fully vaccinated”; “I am not yet fully vaccinated. I received
         only one dose of an accepted two-dose COVID-19 vaccine or I received my final
         dose of an accepted COVID-19 less than two weeks ago”; “I have not been
         vaccinated”; or “I decline to respond.”

      4. He was terminated on January 28, 2022. 2

In its April 4, 2022 accept/dismiss letter, the Agency accepted issues 1, 3 (without reference to
the attestation), and 4 for investigation. It dismissed issue 2, which was then defined with slightly
different dates than now, for failure to state a claim. It reasoned opposing perceived
discrimination, and protective “harassment provisions” do not “serve as a license for the
employee to neglect job duties.”

After an EEO investigation on issues 1, 3, and 4, the Agency dismissed Complainant’s entire
complaint for failure to state a claim because it was not his joint employer under common law. It
dismissed the reprisal basis of issue 1 because the alleged EEO activity occurred prior to the
actions complained of and dismissed issue 3 because it concerned only the staffing firm.

The instant appeal followed.




2
    Some of the issues have been redefined to better reflect Complainant’s allegations.
                                                3                                     2022004938

On appeal, Complainant argues that his discrimination case is meritorious, Agency and staffing
firm personnel gave incorrect information on discrimination in the EEO process/investigation,
and the EEO investigation was inadequate.

In reply, the Agency argues that it did not jointly employ Complainant, the reasonable
accommodation process was strictly between the staffing firm and Complainant, and the staffing
firm removed Complainant because he refused to identify his vaccination status, get vaccinated,
enter into the reasonable accommodation process, discuss employment opportunities that did not
require travel, and unlike the Agency required all federal contractors be vaccinated as a condition
of employment.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Joint Employment – Standing to File a Complaint

The 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 EEO complaint process is limited to employees and applicants for
employment in covered departments, agencies and units. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(c).

In Serita B. v. Department of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150846 (November 10, 2016),
the Commission reaffirmed its long-standing position on “joint employers” and noted it is found
in numerous sources. See, e.g., EEOC Compliance Manual Section 2, “Threshold Issues,”
Section 2-III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) OLC Control No. EEOC-CVG-2000-2 (May 12, 2000)
(Compliance Manual); EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Application of EEO Laws to Contingent
Workers Placed by Temporary Employment Agencies and Other Staffing Firms OLC Control
No. EEOC-CVG-1998-2 (Dec. 3, 1997) (Enforcement Guidance), “Coverage Issues,” Question
2; Ma v. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 & 01962390 (May
29, 1998). We reiterate the analysis set forth in those decisions and guidance documents in this
decision.

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each exercise sufficient control
of an individual to qualify as the worker’s employer. Compliance Manual, Section 2-
III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). To determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise sufficient control,
EEOC considers factors derived from common law principles of agency. See Enforcement
Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2. EEOC considers, inter alia, the Agency’s right to
control when, where, and how the worker performs the job; the right to assign additional projects
to the worker; whether the work is performed on Agency premises; whether the Agency provides
the tools, material, and equipment to perform the job; the duration of the relationship between
the Agency and the worker whether the Agency controls the worker’s schedule; and whether the
Agency can discharge the worker. Compliance Manual, Section 2-III(A)(1) (citing Nationwide
Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318, 323-24 (1992)); EEOC v. Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550
F.App’x 253, 256 (6th Cir. 2013) (“Entities are joint employers if they 'share or co-determine
those matters governing essential terms and conditions of employment'”) (quoting Carrier Corp.
v. NLRB, 768 F.2d 778, 781 (6th Cir. 1985); see also Ma.
                                                 4                                      2022004938

On the factor of the right to control when, where, and how the worker performs the job and to
assign additional projects, complete agency control is not required. Rather, the control may be
partial or joint and still point to joint employment. Shorter v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120131148 (June 11, 2013) (where both staffing firm and agency made
assignments, this pointed to joint employment); Complainant v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120143162 (May 20, 2015), req. to reconsider denied, EEOC Request No.
0520150430 (Mar. 11, 2016) (where staffing firm wrote and issued complainant’s appraisal with
input from agency, this pointed toward joint employment). Likewise, where both the agency and
staffing firm provided tools, material, and equipment to perform the job, this pointed to joint
employment. Elkin v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120122211, 2012 WL 5818075
(Nov. 8, 2012).

Similarly, where a staffing firm terminates a worker after an agency communicates it no longer
wants the worker’s services, this supports a finding that the agency has joint or de facto power to
discharge the worker. See, e.g., Complainants v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal Nos.
0120141963 & 0120141762 (Jan. 28, 2015); see also Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550 Fed. App’x
at 254, 256 (where defendant removed staffing firm’s workers from job site without challenge
from staffing firm, and after such removals staffing firm generally fired worker, this pointed to
joint employment); Butler v. Drive Auto. Indus. of America, Inc., 793 F.3d 404, 414-15 (4th Cir.
2015).

The EEOC considers an entity’s right to control the terms and conditions of employment,
whether or not it exercises that right, as relevant to joint employer status. Enforcement Guidance,
“Coverage Issues,” at Question 2, Example 5 (where an entity reserves the right to direct the
means and manner of an individual’s work, but does not generally exercise that right, the entity
may still be found to be a joint employer).

In assessing the right to control, EEOC does not consider any one factor to be decisive and
emphasizes that it is not necessary to satisfy a majority of the factors. The fact that an individual
performs work pursuant to a contract between the federal government and an outside
organization and is paid and provided with benefits by that organization, on its own, is not
enough to show that joint employment does not exist. Rather, the analysis is holistic; all the
circumstances in the individual’s relationship with the agency should be considered to determine
if the agency should be deemed the worker’s joint employer. Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage
Issues,” at Qs. 1 and 2. In sum, a federal agency will qualify as a joint employer of an individual
if it has the requisite right to control the means and manner of the individual’s work, regardless
of whether the individual is paid by an outside organization or is on the federal payroll. See id.,
at Q. 2.

The record shows Complainant worked on Agency premises using Agency and staffing firm
equipment. He served the Agency as a full-time Chemical/Biological Instructor Technician from
mid-2018 to December 2022, a long duration.
                                                5                                     2022004938

The Agency Chief gave Complainant his “daily task, purpose and direction.” Report of
Investigation (ROI), Ex. F4 at ¶ 9, Bates No. 86 (affidavit of Agency Contracting Officer’s
Representative) (COR). Complainant was intermittently assigned administrative tasks by his
staffing firm supervisor, who was located in Virginia. Any overtime requested was by the
Agency Chief and Agency COR and approved by his staffing firm supervisor. Complainant’s
work was part of the Agency’s regular on-going business. Id. (“Id.” means same as previous
cite), at ¶ 13, Bates No. 87. The Agency had the authority to make Complainant’s working hours
align with the mission. Id., at ¶ 16. The Agency Chief and staffing firm supervisor supervised the
performance of Complainant’s tasks. All these factors, except the staffing firm supervisor
intermittently assigning Complainant administrative tasks, point to the Agency being
Complainant’s joint employer.

On October 25, 2021, the Contracting Activity head for the Defense Threat Reduction Agency
issued a memorandum to all Agency contractors directing that those who are not fully vaccinated
or decline to give their vaccination status were restricted from all Agency mission travel. He
instructed all Agency contractors to complete the attestation, keep a copy, and be prepared to
show it to authorized Agency personnel upon request.

According to the Agency COR, Complainant could not perform his duties without traveling
throughout Germany and Europe. The COR stated that he notified the staffing firm that
Complainant had to be vaccinated to travel and the Agency Contracting Officer notified the
staffing firm that the Agency likely would not pay for Complainant’s services if he could not
perform his duties. On December 30, 2021, Complainant’s staffing firm supervisor emailed
Complainant that the Agency directed he be removed from the contract because he would not
complete the attestation and get vaccinated, both of which the Agency required to permit him go
on Agency mission travel.

Because the thrust of Complainant’s complaint involves a denial of accommodation and his
termination, the circumstances surrounding these things are significant to deciding whether the
Agency is a joint employer of Complainant for EEO complaint purposes. Noah W. v. Interior,
EEOC Appeal No. 2022003191 (Sep. 27, 2022). It is uncontested that the staffing firm fully
controlled the mechanics of the reasonable accommodation process. But the Agency’s position
that Complainant could not do his job without traveling, that he must complete the attestation
and be fully vaccinated to travel, and that no mitigating measures could substitute for vaccination
(like masking and getting tested weekly for COVID-19) left the staffing firm with no options to
explore an accommodation that would exempt him from vaccination and still serve the Agency,
and no way to address the attestation issue.

In its reply brief, the Agency argues that Noah W., where the complainant asked for an
exemption from an agency’s masking mandate as a reasonable accommodation, ruled the
determinative factor in finding the agency was not a joint employer was the staffing firm’s
control over the reasonable accommodation process, like the case before us. We disagree. In
Noah W., the complainant worked from home except when he came to the agency’s federal
facility quarterly for several hours to update/change passwords.
                                                6                                     2022004938

The agency suggested to the staffing firm that a solution would be having another contractor
update/change passwords. Instead, the staffing firm terminated the complainant. Based on this,
the Commission found in Noah W. that the staffing firm played the significant role in the
reasonable accommodation process and the termination. But here, because the Agency left no
avenues open for a reasonable accommodation that would allow Complainant to continue to
serve the Agency, we disagree that the staffing firm controlled the reasonable accommodation
process which would allow Complainant to continue serving the Agency.

The Agency argues that the staffing firm terminated Complainant because he refused to give
information on his vaccination status and would not enter into the reasonable accommodation
process, discuss employment opportunities that did not require travel, and the staffing firm,
unlike the Agency, required all federal contractors be vaccinated as a condition of employment.
It points to the staffing firm’s COVID-19 vaccination policy, as revised on November 2, 2021,
which required all federal contractors complete the attestation and be vaccinated to comply with
a Presidential executive order and agency specific guidance not directly impacted by the
executive order.

We are not persuaded that the staffing firm made an independent decision to remove
Complainant based on its own requirements. The staffing firm only removed Complainant from
the contract serving the Agency after the Agency demanded this. In a position paper the staffing
firm submitted to the Agency EEO office dated June 1, 2022, the staffing firm wrote it had to
terminate Complainant on January 28, 2022, because his position under its contract with the
Agency required travel, and the Agency would not permit him to go on Agency mission travel
unless he completed the attestation and was fully vaccinated. The staffing firm represented that it
asked Complainant to do these things because the Agency required them. It wrote that after it
became clear Complainant would not complete the attestation, it treated him as unvaccinated,
consistent with Agency policy. 3 The staffing firm represented that while Complainant did not
seek other roles within the staffing firm, it had no roles available at that time for which he was
qualified.

Based on the above, we find that the Agency had sufficient control over Complainant’s
employment under common law to be his joint employer. Therefore, the Agency’s decision to
dismiss the entire complaint for lack of standing is reversed.

In addition to the dismissal of the entire complaint for lack of standing, the Agency also
dismissed some of the issues on other grounds which we will discuss below.




3
  The attestation form states that providing the information requested in it is voluntary but
includes language that those who do not do so will be treated as not fully vaccinated. On
November 15, 2021, the staffing firm’s Human Resources Manager emailed Complainant that if
he did not complete the attestation or send him an email identifying his vaccination status by
November 18, 2021, she would mark him down as declining to respond.
                                                7                                     2022004938

Issue 1

In Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993), the Supreme Court reaffirmed the
holding of Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 67 (1986), that harassment is
actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the complainant's
employment. The Court explained that an "objectively hostile or abusive work environment [is
created when] a reasonable person would find [it] hostile or abusive” and the complainant
subjectively perceives it as such. Harris, at 21-22. To the extent that the complainant is alleging
that the remarks constituted harassment, the Commission notes that unless the conduct is severe,
a single incident or group of isolated incidents will not be regarded as a claim of discriminatory
harassment. Id., at 21.

We find that issue 1 does not rise to the level of actionable harassment even when considered
with Complainant’s remaining allegations, one of which, as found below, was speculative and
another of which, as found below, did not involve the Agency. We also find that the Agency
Chief’s warning would not reasonably likely deter EEO activity.

Issue 2

The Agency dismissed issue 2 for failure to state a claim.

A disability-related inquiry is a question that is likely to elicit information about a disability.
EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical Examinations of
Employees under the ADA (“Guidance”), at General Principles, B.1, OLC Control No. EEOC-
CVG-2000-4 (July 26, 2000). Under the Rehabilitation Act, post-employment disability-related
inquiries are permitted only in limited situations. Id. Here, however, asking an employee if he is
vaccinated against COVID-19 vaccination is not likely to disclose the existence of a disability
because there are many reasons an employee may not provide confirmation of vaccination
besides having a disability. EEOC What You Should Know About COVID-19 and the ADA, the
Rehabilitation Act, and Other EEO Laws, Question K.9 (Updated Jul. 12, 2022).

But documentation or other confirmation of vaccination provided by the employee to the
employer is medical information about the employee and must be kept confidential, with
permitted release in limited circumstances. Id., at B, and K.4. We find that while Complainant
surmised his attestation might be improperly disclosed in violation of the Rehabilitation Act, this
was speculative. For this reason, we affirm the Agency’s dismissal of issue 2.

Issue 3

The Agency dismissed issue 3 because it concerned only the staffing firm. We agree.
                                                8                                     2022004938

Issue 4

Issue 4 states a claim because the Agency was Complainant’s common law joint employer, and
at least for this procedural determination, it exercised de facto power to terminate his
employment. 4

                                         CONCLUSION

The Agency’s dismissal decision is AFFIRMED in part and REVERSED in part.

                                             ORDER

The Agency is ordered to process the remanded claim, issue 4 as defined in this decision, in
accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f) et seq. This means that within 30 days of the date of
this decision, the Agency must provide Complainant a copy of the investigative file, if it has not
done so already, and notify him of the right to request a hearing and decision from an EEOC
administrative judge or an immediate final decision per 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110 from the Agency.
If the Agency EEO function believes a supplemental investigation is needed because of the way
the remanded claim was redefined, the Agency shall complete the supplemental investigation
within 90 days of the date of this decision, and within 120 days of the date of this decision
provide him a copy of the investigative file, if it has not already done so, and the supplemental
investigation with the above referenced notice. These timelines can be extended if the Agency
asks Complainant in writing for an extension, and Complainant agrees in writing to give an
extension.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting
documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket
number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the
Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the
Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

4
  Complainant argued to his staffing firm that Presidential Executive Order 14042 (Sept. 9, 2021)
on ensuring adequate covid safety protocols for federal contractors, which the White House Safer
Federal Workforce Task Force once interpreted as requiring vaccinations of certain federal
contractors except in limited circumstances did not apply to ones working outside the United
States, so it did not cover him. His staffing firm, after seeking legal guidance agreed, but wrote
Complainant that DoD policy, agency policy, and local policy do apply, referring to the Defense
Threat Reduction Agency’s October 25, 2021 travel policy. We note that explicit language in EO
Order 14042 states it does not apply outside the United States or its outlying areas. This does not
include Germany. The Agency does not assert EO Order 14043 (Sept. 9, 2021) on requiring
vaccinations of federal employees against Covid-19 applied to Complainant.
                                                9                                     2022004938

The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when previously not
uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her
representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                               10                                   2022004938

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 11                                     2022004938

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 8, 2023
Date
