             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Leigh K. 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                  (Field Areas and Regions),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022002006

                                Hearing No. 530-2021-00234X

                                 Agency No. 4C-080-0101-13

                                          DECISION

On March 3, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 9, 2021, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Bulk Mail
Technician, PS-07, at the Agency’s Processing & Distribution Center in Trenton, New Jersey.

On August 22, 2013, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (White), sex (male), age, and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when, beginning on May 3, 2013, he was not allowed to report to his bid
in the Bulk Mail Unit until he passed a full fitness for duty examination.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022002006

The Agency accepted the complaint and conducted an investigation which produced the
following pertinent facts.

Complainant attested that he did not know why he was required to undergo a fitness for duty
examination because he was never provided a reason. However, he produced a copy of an email,
dated April 30, 2013, from a Labor Relations Specialist to Complainant’s supervisor informing
him that Complainant needed to be instructed to attend his appointment for a full fitness for duty
examination, as per the Last Chance Agreement. Complainant denied signing a Last Chance
Agreement requiring that he undergo such an examination.

Complainant identified a prior EEO case number, dated May 16, 2012, as his prior protected
activity. He also indicated he believed he was not allowed back in his bid because his original
case was initiated by a Black woman and that his age was a factor because his coworkers and
supervisor were younger.

The Labor Relations Specialist attested that he was involved in the decision not to allow
Complainant to return to the Bulk Mail Unit until he passed a fitness for duty examination. He
explained that requiring Complainant to pass a fitness for duty examination prior to returning to
his bid was due to a perceived threat that Complainant had made at the workplace. He explained
that requiring a fitness for duty examination in such circumstances was normal protocol for the
protection of all employees and the service. He explained that after he requested the fitness for
duty examination, a Manager for Labor Relations approved the request, and it then went to
Human Resources for final approval. He identified the policy relevant to requiring Complainant
to pass a full fitness for duty examination as EL-860-2000-7.

The Manager for Labor Relations attested that the decision not to allow Complainant to report to
his bid was made in conjunction with the Postal Inspection Service. She explained that
Complainant was required to pass the fitness for duty examination because of threats he made to
other employees in the Bulk Mail Unit.

The Plant Manager attested that, while he was not involved in the decision to not have
Complainant report to his bid until he passed the fitness for duty examination, he was fully aware
that the Postal Inspection Service was involved with the issues surrounding Complainant’s
threats in the workplace. He also indicated that there was a Last Change Agreement, but there
was nothing in that agreement requiring Complainant to take the fitness for duty examination.

The Occupational Health Nurse Administrator attested that she contacted the physician and
scheduled the fitness for duty examination. She explained that the Request for Fitness for Duty
Examination, dated May 11, 2013, indicated that Complainant had to pass a full fitness for duty
examination. It indicated that Complainant made a threatening statement towards fellow
employees and stated that “If I lose my job, I should buy a machine gun and come to the Bulk
Mail Unit and start with the person that told on me.” She attested that the policy relied upon to
require Complainant to pass the fitness for duty examination prior to reporting to the Bulk Mail
Unit was the Fitness-for-Duty Examinations Management Instruction EL-860-2000-7.
                                                 3                                     2022002006

Fitness-for-Duty Examinations, Management Instruction EL-860-2000-7, provides, in pertinent
part, that the Agency’s management may request a fitness-for-duty examination as necessary to
safeguard the employee and coworkers when there is concern about an employee’s ability to
perform his or her job, based on the observations of a supervisor, manager, or medical personnel.

An Investigative Memorandum from the U.S Postal Inspection Service, dated April 4, 2012,
indicates that, on March 9, 2012, the National Law Enforcement Communication Center
received a call reporting that Complainant made a threat that, “If I get fired, I will get a machine
gun and kill the person who told on me.” That same day, Complainant was placed on Emergency
Placement.

The Agency conducted a Pre-disciplinary Interview on March 22, 2012, and, on May 10, 2012,
issued Complainant a Notice of Removal for Improper Conduct – Threat of Violence. The
Agency subsequently agreed to return Complainant to his position on a Last Chance Agreement.

A Last Chance Agreement, dated September 28, 2012, indicate that Complainant’s return to
work will be contingent upon his submitting to and passing a fitness for duty examination. The
copy of record appears to have some signatures, but the writing is unclear.

A letter dated May 11, 2012, from the Labor Relations Specialist addressed “To whom it may
concern” indicates that Complainant was required to pass a full fitness for duty examination. It
notes that on March 7, 2012, it was reported that Complainant made a threatening statement
towards fellow employees, that, “If I lose my job, I should buy a machine gun and come to the
Bulk Mail Unit and start with the person who told on me.” It also provides, “As per
Managements rights and the safety of our employees we have requested this fitness for duty
exam prior to allowing [Complainant] to report to his recently selected position in the Bulk Mail
Unit.”

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing
but subsequently withdrew his request and requested a final agency decision. The AJ then
remanded the case to the Agency. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The final decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
                                                  4                                     2022002006

“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis set forth in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Under this analysis, a complainant initially must
establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably
give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the
adverse employment action. See St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 507 (1993); Tex.
Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (1981); McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at
802.

The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253. Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant has the
responsibility to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s action was
based on prohibited considerations of discrimination, that is, its articulated reason for its action
was not its true reason but a sham or pretext for discrimination. See Hicks, 509 U.S. at 511;
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 252-53; McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804.

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the
factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the
ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-14 (1983).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, the
Agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its action. The Agency
explained that the requirement that Complainant pass a fitness for duty examination was due to
his prior threats of workplace violence. While there may be some question as to whether
Complainant signed a Last Chance Agreement requiring him to take a fitness for duty
examination, the record shows that such a requirement, under these circumstances, where
Complainant threatened to shoot his co-workers with a machine gun, would be in accordance
with Agency policy when management has concerns regarding the safety of its employees.

Because the Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, the burden
shifts to Complainant to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency’s
reason was a pretext for discrimination.
                                                  5                                 2022002006

Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such weaknesses, inconsistencies, or contradictions in
the Agency’s proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact finder could
rationally find them unworthy of credence. See Opare-Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007). Upon review of the record in its entirety, we find that
Complainant has not shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s explanation
was pretext, designed to conceal discriminatory or retaliatory animus.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                6                                     2022002006

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


November 21, 2022
Date
