             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                          Erick K., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                      Merrick B. Garland,
                                       Attorney General
                                     Department of Justice
                                    (U.S. Marshals Service),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021004745

                                 Agency No. USM-2018-00015

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 30, 2021, final
decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Deputy United
States Marshal (DUSM), GS-1811-12, at the Agency’s Southern District of New York in New
York, New York.

On November 17, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (African American) and in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                   2021004745

       1.      On August 31, 2017, during his GS-13 Competency Assessment Promotional
               Examination, he was subjected to irregularities in testing procedures and
               conditions not established under the proctoring criteria. Complainant further
               asserts that these conditions impaired his ability to focus and test competently and
               resulted in underperformance on his competency assessment; and

       2.      On November 2, 2017, he was not selected for multiple merit promotion
               vacancies. 2

Claim 1 – Irregularities in the Testing Process

Complainant averred he was subjected to numerous irregularities when he took the GS-13
Competency Assessment Promotional Examination on August 31, 2017. The Competency
Assessment is the examination used to evaluate a candidate’s suitability for promotion to a GS-
1811-13 position. Complainant stated that the assessment guidelines indicate that candidates are
to report to the testing site 30 minutes prior to the examination to review the test instructions,
however the Proctor (a Supervisory DUSM) sent him a text message the day of the assessment
informing him to arrive only 20 minutes in advance. Additionally, Complainant stated the
Proctor erred by failing to provide Complainant with the proper testing instructions, which
caused him to inadvertently log out of the system. He also performed a pat-down search of
Complainant before the assessment started. The Competency Assessment does not have an
established requirement that authorizes Proctors to touch or make physical contact with testing
candidates.

The Proctor was a trained and certified GS-1811-13 Proctor for the Agency. He has been in a
leadership position for several years. The Proctor explained that he mistakenly believed that he
was to conduct a search for electronic devices, because they were not allowed during the
assessment. He stated that he himself had been previously subjected to a similar search for
electronic devices when he took a prior assessment that was proctored by an Agency contractor.
A week before Complainant’s pat down, the Proctor had patted down two other candidates. One
was White and the other Hispanic.

Complainant claimed he was not in possession of any prohibited items before or after the search.
The pat down of Complainant resulted in the Proctor finding Complainant’s personal cell phone,
which Complainant had not previously turned over when asked about electronic devices.

Complainant experienced computer issues during the assessment and accidentally exited out of
the system.


2
  The Agency initially issued a final decision on this complaint in June 2019, but withdrew the
decision after determining that this complaint should be subsumed into a class complaint, Fogg,
et al v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC No. 570-2016-00501X. In June 2021, the Agency’s Office of
General Counsel determined that the complaint involved a different merit promotion process
than the one at issue in the class action complaint and the Agency re-issued this final decision.
                                                3                                     2021004745

The Proctor contacted the test administrator. Complainant was given the option of continuing
with the assessment the same day with additional time or rescheduling to another day.
Complainant chose to continue the assessment the same day. He was given the full amount of
time to complete the assessment as confirmed by the testing consultant.

After taking the assessment, Complainant complained to the Human Resources Division that his
test started late. Upon receiving Complainant’s request to retake the test, the Merit Promotion
Branch Chief called the testing consultant who reviewed his testing records, and confirmed that
Complainant had taken the entire exam for the full amount of time.

Complainant complained to the Agency senior leadership regarding the irregularities. He asked
to be retested but was denied, because it would have given him an unfair advantage.

The Chief DUSM averred that he found out that the Proctor performed pat down searches on all
the testing candidates he proctored, in an effort to locate electronic devices. He told the Proctor
not to conduct pat down searches in the future. The Assistant Chief DUSM met with
Complainant on September 11, 2017, after Complainant submitted a memorandum alleging that
he was unfairly harassed prior to his assessment. The Assistant Chief told Complainant that the
Proctor should not have patted him down prior to the assessment, but that the Proctor was
unaware that he was not supposed to search candidates.

Claim 2 – Non-Selections

Complainant applied for multiple merit promotion vacancies, but the record showed that
Complainant did not apply for two of the 13 vacancy announcements he identified. The record
shows that Complainant did make the Best Qualified List for two of the positions: Vacancy
Announcement No. MPA 17-317 (Criminal Investigator, GS-1811-13) and Vacancy
Announcement No. MPA 17-252 (Supervisory DUSM, GS-1811-13), but he was not selected.
Two more qualified candidates were selected. Complainant does not contend that his
qualifications were superior to those of the two selected.

Regarding the other positions, he did not make the certificate for the multiple vacancies because
of his low assessment score. The Branch Chief testified his Merit Promotion Score [of 64.4] fell
below the respective score cut-offs. Complainant claimed the irregularities caused him to
underperform on the assessment because he had been distracted and humiliated by the Proctor’s
actions.

In addition, he averred that he was not selected because he filed an EEO complaint. The Branch
Chief averred she was unaware of Complainant’s EEO status until she received the interrogatory
from the EEO investigator, which occurred after the Best Qualified Lists were created and the
selectees’ names announced on November 2, 2017.
                                                4                                    2021004745

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. Complainant requested a final agency decision.
The Agency issued a final decision finding that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination
as alleged.

In the decision, the Agency determined that Agency management articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Specifically, the Proctor said he told Complainant to
arrive 20 minutes early instead of the 30 minutes stated in the assessment guidelines because the
check-in process only takes about five minutes. Further, the Proctor said he conducted a pat
down search of Complainant for electronic devices because he believed that was what he was
supposed to do. Management acknowledged that the Proctor should not have pat searched any
candidates and that they told him to discontinue this procedure after Complainant complained.
The Proctor additionally explained that when Complainant experienced computer issues, he
contacted the testing company by phone and gave Complainant the option of continuing with the
assessment or rescheduling for another day. Complainant voluntarily chose to continue, and he
was provided the full amount of time to complete the assessment.

Regarding the non-selections, Complainant alleged that when the Career Board announced its
selections for multiple supervisory vacancies in November 2017, he was not selected for any
positions because of his underperformance on the Competency Assessment Promotional
Examination. He claimed that if he had been allowed to take the assessment under the same
conditions as others, he would have scored higher and would have had a better chance of making
the Best Qualified list for more of the vacancies. The Agency determined that, while the Proctor
made errors during the assessment, there was no evidence that the Proctor acted with
discriminatory animus. Further, Complainant voluntarily chose to continue with the assessment
after being given the opportunity to reschedule.

As to the non-selections for the position for which he made the Best Qualified list, the Assistant
Chief explained that the selectee for the SDUSM position (Selectee 1) advertised under Vacancy
Announcement No. MPA 17-252 had been an Acting SDUSM and Team Leader for four years,
which was longer than Complainant had even been a DUSM in the District. Assistant Chief
added that Selectee 1 had missed recent promotions “by the skin of his teeth” and possessed
proven leadership qualities. Selectee 1 was the candidate recommended by the Career Board
Presenter while Complainant was ranked fifth among the Best Qualified candidates. With regard
to the Criminal Investigator position announced under Vacancy Announcement No. MPA 17-
317, the Career Board Presenter explained that the selectee (Selectee 2) was serving in a GS-14
capacity and was chosen based on his superior qualifications and leadership experience that far
exceeded Complainant’s qualifications and experience. Complainant was ranked seventh among
the 12 candidates under consideration.

The Agency concluded that the preponderance of the evidence in the record established that the
two selectees were better qualified candidates than Complainant for the positions in question.
                                               5                                    2021004745

The Agency noted that Complainant admitted that he did not have much experience as a DUSM
and that there were candidates better qualified for supervisory positions than him.

The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to show that Agency management’s reasons for
its actions were pretextual. As a result, the Agency concluded that Complainant was not
subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, he
or she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited
consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for its actions. See Texas Dep’t of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products,
Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993);
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

Assuming arguendo that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and
reprisal, we find that the Agency has articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions. With respect to claim (1), the Proctor and Agency management acknowledged that
errors occurred during the Competency Assessment Promotional Examination. The Proctor
performed the pat-down search on Complainant and other candidates because he believed he was
required to do so. Agency management later informed the Proctor that he was not required to do
so. When computer issues occurred, the Proctor contacted the testing vendor and provided
Complainant the opportunity to reschedule. Complainant ultimately decided to continue with the
assessment and was given the full amount of time.
                                                6                                    2021004745

Regarding the non-selections in claim (2), as more fully discussed above, Complainant’s low
score rendered him ineligible for further consideration for most of the positions and Agency
officials selected individuals who they believed were the best qualified for the position based on
their demonstrated leadership qualities and experience.

Complainant did not offer evidence to dispute these reasons as pretextual and Complainant has
not established that the actions were based on unlawful discriminatory or retaliatory animus.
Specifically, regarding his non-selections, Complainant conceded that his qualifications were not
superior to the selectees. We find, therefore, Complainant failed to prove, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that management’s proffered reasons were pretext designed to mask race
discrimination or unlawful retaliation.

Finally, to the extent Complainant is alleging that he was subjected to a hostile work
environment, we find that under the standards set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510
U.S. 17 (1993), Complainant's claim of hostile work environment must fail. See Enforcement
Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Mar. 8, 1994). A
finding of a hostile work environment is precluded by our determination that Complainant failed
to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to whether any of the actions taken by Agency
officials were motivated by unlawful considerations of Complainant’s protected classes.


                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the final agency decision.


                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:


       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration.
                                                7                                     2021004745

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.



                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs.
                                                  8                                     2021004745

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request
the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court
costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has
the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time
limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations



August 23, 2023
Date
