             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                         Bryan T., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                     Merrick B. Garland,
                                      Attorney General,
                                    Department of Justice
                                   (U.S. Marshals Service),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2022003105

                               Agency No. USMS-2020-02020

                                         DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated May 12, 2022, finding no discrimination
concerning Complainant’s complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and
Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §791
et seq. For the following reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Public Safety
Communications Specialist, GS-7, subject to a one-year probationary period, at the Agency’s
Communications Center, Office of Emergency Management, Tactical Operations Division
Facility in Springfield, Virginia.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2022003105

On October 21, 2020, Complainant filed his complaint alleging discrimination based on
disability (anxiety/post traumatic stress disorder) and in reprisal for prior EEO activity when in
September 2020, he was placed on telework status pending an investigation, and on September
25, 2020, his probationary employment with the Agency was terminated.

After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing. The Agency issued its final Agency decision concluding that it
asserted legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its action, which Complainant failed to rebut.

The record indicates that on November 24, 2019, Complainant was hired as a Public Safety
Communications Specialist, GS-7, via a Career Conditional appointment, subject to a one-year
probationary period. As a Public Safety Communications Specialist, Complainant provided
customer service to internal and external customers, including answering phone calls from the
general public. Public Safety Communications Specialists, including Complainant, rotated their
work shift to cover 24 hours per day customer service. At least two specialists were assigned for
each rotation.

Complainant indicated that on September 1, 2020, he asked management to be allowed to bring
in a firearm to work for personal protection because he, and his coworkers, received numerous
threats from telephone callers.       He also indicated that due to the coronavirus, the
Communications Center facility doors were being propped open which could allow anyone to
enter the facility, and during the evening shift, he worked with only one other person in the
facility.

On September 2, 2020, Complainant’s second-level supervisor (S2), a GS-14, Assistant Chief,
held a meeting to discuss Complainant’s concerns. When S2 informed Complainant that he was
not allowed to bring a firearm into the facility, he became upset and argumentative over S2’s
response. S2 indicated that he thus invited a GS-14, Chief Inspector into the meeting to help
Complainant understand the situation. Upon S2’s invitation, the Chief Inspector attended the
meeting. The Chief Inspector stated that when she denied Complainant’s request to bring a
firearm into work, as he was not a sworn law enforcement officer, she thought he wanted to get
into a physical altercation and was going to attack her at one point. She thus placed Complainant
on telework pending a workplace violence investigation for the safety of her staff and her safety
based on his conduct. The Chief Inspector noted that while Complainant was on telework status,
she reviewed Complainant’s work performance and learned that he was counseled on multiple
occasions due to his inappropriate behavior with callers.

Complainant’s first-level supervisor (S1), a GS-13, Supervisory Public Communications
Specialist, stated that the doors inside the building were left often so the employees did not have
to touch the door handles because of the coronavirus but the outside doors were secure, and a
security code was required to enter the facility.
                                                3                                     2022003105

Complainant’s work leader, a GS-12, Lead Communications System Specialist, indicated that the
facility had the local police department patrols and a contract service to protect the facility,
especially at night. The work leader stated that Complainant was observed being very angry to
callers, and on one occasion, he screamed at a caller, causing one of his coworkers to walk out of
the office.

The record indicates that a Senior Executive Service, Assistant Director notified Complainant
that effective September 25, 2020, he would be terminated during his probationary period for
unacceptable performance. In his September 25, 2020 termination letter, the Assistant Director
stated that on August 11, 18, and 25, 2020, Complainant was counseled concerning his poor
handling of calls; and during the September 2, 2020 meeting, he was very upset and he was sent
home due to his unprofessional conduct and insisting on bring a firearm into work. Complainant
acknowledged that he was counseled on several occasions in August 2020, concerning his work
performance.

The Agency found that it did not discriminate against Complainant as alleged. Complainant
appeals the Agency’s decision and submits a brief in support of the appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law").

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he or she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would
support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509
U.S. 502 (1993).
                                               4                                   2022003105

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

The Commission shall assume without deciding (for the purposes of this decision) that
Complainant is an individual with a disability. Complainant has not claimed that he was denied
a reasonable accommodation.

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we find
that the Agency proffered a legitimate, nondiscrimination reason for its actions. Regarding his
being placed on telework status, the record indicates that during the September 2, 2020 meeting
with S2 and the Chief Inspector, Complainant became upset, yelled, and was argumentative
when they denied his request to bring a firearm into work. Based on Complainant’s conduct, the
Chief Inspector believed that Complainant might get into a physical altercation and attack her.
Thus, stated the Chief Inspector, Complainant was placed on telework pending a workplace
violence investigation for the safety of her and her staff based on his conduct. The Agency
stated that Complainant was terminated on September 25, 2020, during his probationary period
for his unacceptable performance based on his poor handling of calls on several occasions in
August 2020, and his unprofessional behavior during the September 2, 2020 meeting.

After a review of the record, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination. Further, we find that Complainant
failed to show that there were any similarly situated employees not in his protected groups who
were treated differently under similar circumstances. Based on the foregoing, we find that
Complainant has failed to show that the Agency’s action was motivated by discrimination as he
alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.
                                                5                                    2022003105

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                6                                     2022003105

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 26, 2023
Date
