             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Russel D., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                        Frank Kendall,
                                          Secretary,
                                  Department of the Air Force,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022000388

                                  Agency No. 9R1M2000814

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s September 5, 2021 final
decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the
Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Logistics
Management Specialist, GS-0346-12, at the Agency’s Life Cycle Management Center (LCMC),
Air Force Material Command (AFMC) at Robins Air Force Base in Georgia.

On September 24, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (African-American), sex (male), color (Black),
and age (60) when, on June 10, 2020, Complainant was not selected for the position of Deputy
Section Chief, MQ-9 Logistics Branch, NH-0346-03, Tier 2 position, for which he applied under
job posting LG_1587124291471.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2022000388

Complainant applied for the position of Deputy Section Chief, MQ-9 Logistics Branch. The
selection process involved two stages. The first stage involved the scoring of the candidate’s
resumes. The second stage involved the scoring of the candidate’s interviews. Candidates could
receive a maximum of 300 points.

The three-person interview panel used pre-drafted questions that had been approved by the
selecting official (SO). The interviews were conducted by telephone. Complainant was
interviewed on June 9, 2020. Complainant’s total score was 191.7, which ranked him fourth out
of the final group of six candidates. He was rated poorly in his verbal communication skills as
he rushed through many questions. The selectee scored 259.7, which ranked him first among the
group. On June 10, 2020, Complainant learned he was not selected. SO selected the highest
ranked candidate for the position. The selectee was an African American (Black) male, but the
record indicates the selectee was younger than Complainant.

Complainant believed that his age was a factor. He averred that he has applied before and that, in
each instance, younger people are selected. In this case, Complainant acknowledged that he was
unaware of the selectee’s qualifications for the position. He asserted, nevertheless, he believed
that he was more qualified, due to his high job performance rating and his 35 years of
experience.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The
Agency stated, “while Complainant clearly believes he was the best qualified applicant, the
record does not support his conclusion that his qualifications were so superior to the selectee’s as
to render the selection decision discriminatory.” This appeal followed.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                3                                     2022000388

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, he or she
must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. The burden
then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See
Texas Dep’t of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail,
Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency's explanation is a
pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143
(2000); St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we
determine, however, that the Agency articulated legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for its
actions. Officials explained they did not select Complainant for several reasons: 1) the
objectively rated interview score of the person selected was higher; 2) the selectee for the
position was deemed the best qualified and recommended by each of the panel members; and 3)
the selecting official relied on the panel’s recommendation and Complainant failed to show his
qualifications were superior to the qualifications of the person selected. The Chair of the
interview panel affirmed that the selectee performed better than anyone else on the interview by
answering each question thoroughly, giving multiple examples, and explaining his contributions.
By contrast, Complainant spent a lot of time on the first question, but then seemed to rush
through the remaining questions, not providing multiple examples or contribution/result
information. Complainant did not offer sufficient evidence to dispute these reasons and has not
otherwise established that the action was based on unlawful discriminatory animus.

As Complainant did not request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's final credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the
Commission can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. The
Commission finds no persuasive evidence that Complainant's protected classes were a factor in
any of the Agency's actions. At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency's reasons were not the real
reasons and that the Agency acted based on discrimination. Complainant failed to carry this
burden. As a result, the Commission finds that Complainant has not established that he was
subjected to discrimination, as alleged.

                                         CONCLUSION

For these reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s Final Decision.
                                                4                                    2022000388

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                5                                     2022000388

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 10, 2023
Date
