             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Mellissa F., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022000232

                                Hearing No. 480-2020-00750X

                              Agency No. 200P-0691-2019104545

                                          DECISION

On October 18, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
September 16, 2021, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission MODIFIES the Agency’s final decision.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Registered Nurse in
the 4 East Medical-Surgical Unit at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) in West Los
Angeles, California. During the relevant time, Complainant’s first level supervisor was the
Nurse Manager for the 4 East Medical-Surgical Unit (S1).

On September 6, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
her to disparate treatment and a hostile work environment on the bases of disability (depression,
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, Sexual Trauma, insomnia, and anxiety) when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2022000232

    1. Complainant’s first line supervisor, the Nurse Manager 4 East (S1), demanded that
       Complainant work twelve-hour shifts, which Complainant refused. 2

    2. In May 2018, S1 stated in front of coworkers that because the Agency canceled her
       surgery, she should go to another hospital for services, thereby disclosing her confidential
       medical information in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. 3

    3. During January 2019, Complainant was required to work with coworkers who had
       improperly accessed her confidential medical records without authorization.

    4. During January 2019, management failed to resolve Complainant’s sick leave issues in a
       timely manner.

    5. On March 5, 2019, Complainant’s coworker referred to her as “a 50-year-old mental
       patient.”

    6. On May 1, 2019, S1 told Complainant’s coworker, who was allegedly bullying and
       harassing Complainant, not to worry and that she “had her back.”

    7. On May 1, 2019, Complainant was accused of being intimidating and aggressive and was
       accused of engaging in harassing behavior by a coworker who was bullying Complainant.

    8. On May 3, 2019, Complainant was accused of sending an email from another employee’s
       email account.

    9. On May 3, 2019, S1 requested that Complainant sign a misconduct form.

    10. On May 28, 2019, S1 paced in front of Complainant’s work area.

    11. On May 28, 2019, S1 accused her of misconduct.

    12. On June 6, 2019, an unnamed employee interfered with Complainant’s privacy violation
        investigation.

    13. On August 20, 2019, Complainant discovered an article posted on the report table about
        nurses with mental disabilities, which she thought was directed at her.




2
  Originally this claim was listed as “management refused to change Complainant’s schedule to
12-hour shifts.” However, the Agency noted Complainant stated that she did not request to work
12-hour shifts, and S1 “demanded that she switch from 8 to 12 hours.”
3
  In a supplemental affidavit, Complainant stated this event did not happen in May 2018, but that
it occurred in November or December 2017.
                                               3                                    2022000232

   14. On unspecified dates, S1 “split the staff against each other” and did not properly resolve
       issues that occurred on the floor.

The Agency’s Office of Resolution Management (ORM) issued a Notice of Partial Acceptance
dismissing a portion of claim 7 in which Complainant claimed that she was accused of engaging
in harassing behavior by a coworker, for failure to state a claim. The Agency accepted the
remaining claims. The Agency noted that claim 1 constituted a timely raised independently
actionable claim and was also part of the harassment claim. Further, the Agency stated claims 2,
3, and 12 were accepted for investigation as discrete events under the confidentiality provisions
of the Rehabilitation Act, not as a violation of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act or the Privacy Act. The Agency accepted the remaining claims for
investigation.

Complainant noted that she was scheduled to have surgery at the VAMC and that it had been
canceled several times. Complainant noted that each time her surgery was canceled, she had to
redo her request for leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and have S1 sign the
new form. Complainant stated that after the fourth time her surgery was canceled, in November
or December 2017, she presented a new form for S1 to sign which she stated she presented to S1
in S1’s private office. Thereafter, Complainant stated that as S1 walked down the hallway
between the reception station and the nurses’ station, S1 was talking loudly and said, “And you,
you need to go somewhere else to have your surgery. If the VA is not taking care of you, you
need to go to UCLA.” Complainant identified two witnesses to this event: Witness 1, who she
stated heard S1 talking about her surgery and asked if she was okay; and Witness 13, who she
stated was at the reception station and asked why S1 was telling everyone about her surgery.
Further, Complainant stated that she overheard Witness 12 tell another coworker it was unfair for
them to go through Complainant’s medical records and spread information throughout the ward.

Complainant suspected employee(s) had improperly accessed her VAMC medical records. In
April 2019, Complainant contacted the Privacy Office to request a printout of everyone who
accessed her records for the past three years. She noted that she received a report in the mail.
Upon review of the report, Complainant believed that several of the coworkers on the list
accessed her medical records improperly and asked the Privacy Officer to investigate. She stated
the Privacy Officer asked her to review the list and highlight the coworkers who accessed her
record without being involved in her care while she was a patient.

Complainant provided a printout of a list with four columns. The first column lists employees’
names; the second column lists dates and times; the third column lists notes such as “CPRSChart
version 1, Appointment Management, Case No. Exam Edit, Register Patient, Clinical
Scheduling;” and a fourth column lists “No” or “Yes.” Next to the first column is an arrow next
to six names: Coworker 1, Coworker 2, Coworker 3, Coworker 4, Coworker 5, and Coworker 6.
Next to the last column are handwritten notes indicating where the six employees with the arrow
next to their names worked.
                                               4                                    2022000232

The record contains a July 1, 2019 letter addressed to Complainant which was signed by the
Privacy Officer on behalf of the Acting Director. The letter noted that on June 18, 2019, an
email was received from Complainant stating that three coworkers: Coworker 2 (Nurse),
Coworker 3 (Nurse), and Coworker 4 (Nurse) inappropriately accessed her medical record based
upon the Sensitive Patient Access Report (SPAR) provided by their office on April 12, 2019.
The letter stated during the fact-finding process, they discovered that “Ms. [Coworker 4], Ms.
[blank] inappropriately accessed your medical record outside of her duties and responsibilities
and had no valid reason to access your medical records.” The letter stated the other employees
Complainant identified on the SPAR report as having inappropriately accessed her medical
records, “did so within their job responsibilities.” The letter stated the employee’s supervisory
staff were notified and it was “recommended the employee’s immediately retake the mandatory
privacy and security training.”

S1 stated that in response to Complainant’s April 9, 2019 email alleging that a coworker had
possibly accessed her medical records, S1 immediately initiated an inquiry with the Privacy
Officer to verify if a coworker had violated Complainant’s right to privacy by looking at her
medical record. S1 stated that it was discovered that coworkers had violated Complainant’s
privacy. S1 stated that two coworkers that were working with Complainant received disciplinary
action.

S1 provided documentation regarding discipline for two employees. Specifically, the record
contains a letter from the Acting Director to an unidentified addressee dated September 4, 2019.
The letter has a handwritten notation of “Employee 1” and indicates that a decision has been
made to uphold the proposed suspension of seven calendar days for a Privacy Act Violation.
The record also contains a letter from the Acting Director to an unidentified addressee dated
September 5, 2019. The letter has a handwritten notation of “Employee 2” and notes a decision
has been made to mitigate the proposed suspension of seven days to a one-day suspension for a
Privacy Act Violation.

The record contains a Privacy Investigation Report noting that on April 8, 2019, Complainant
requested a SPAR and identified six employees that either currently work with her or on
inpatient ward 4EAB or that worked with her on 4EAB in the past, that she believed
inappropriately accessed her CPRS medical records outside of their job responsibilities. The
report noted that Complainant also alleged that “her supervisor mentioned her surgery during the
presence of other staff during a shift change and in meetings.” It was noted that Complainant
had surgery on June 26, 2018. The report found that out of the six employees identified by
Complainant, two currently working on 4E were determined to have inappropriately accessed
Complainant’s medical record outside their duties and responsibilities. It was noted that
Coworker 4 accessed Complainant’s medical records on June 15, 2018. The report noted that
Coworker 4 said that “everyone was talking about [Complainant’s] surgery, including she and
another employee that she witnessed accessing [Complainant’s] medical record under her
[Coworker 4’s] access.” The report noted Coworker 4 did not have a valid reason for accessing
Complainant’s medical record and that her actions were intentional.
                                               5                                    2022000232

The report also stated that Coworker 3 currently worked on ward 4EAD had accessed
Complainant’s medical records six times throughout 2018 and 2019. According to the report,
Coworker 3 stated she wanted to check the schedule because Complainant had written her up on
several occasions and she did not want to work on the same shift as Complainant. The report
noted that Coworker 3 did not have a valid reason for accessing Complainant’s medical records
and that “scheduling information is not located in CPRS therefore accessing this information is
not for scheduling purposes and was intentional.” Further, it was noted that “[Coworker 4] and
other employees stated that [Complainant] mentioned to them that ‘she was having surgery.’”
The report stated that no evidence was found to confirm that Complainant’s supervisor disclosed
any information regarding her surgery in any meeting.

At the conclusion of the EEO investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing but
subsequently withdrew her request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant
to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In its final decision, the Agency adopted the ORM’s decision to dismiss Complainant’s claim
that on May 1, 2019, a coworker asserted that Complainant had subjected the coworker to
harassment by being intimidating and aggressive. The Agency noted that the claim was accepted
for consideration in Complainant’s overall harassment claim.

The Agency addressed claims 1, 2, 3, and 12 under a disparate treatment theory. Regarding
claim 1, the Agency noted the undisputed evidence showed Complainant remained on her eight-
hour tour of duty at all times. The Agency found this claim was not supported by the record.
Further, the Agency stated even accepting her claim as true, there was no indication of
discriminatory motive.

Regarding claim 2, Complainant claimed that S1 made a statement about her seeking surgery at
another facility in an area where others could overhear S1’s statement, thereby disclosing her
confidential medical information in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. The Agency noted that
S1 stated she only discussed Complainant’s surgery with Complainant privately to offer her
emotional support and argued there was no evidence beyond Complainant’s subjective testimony
that anyone overheard the statement. The Agency noted the six coworkers who were
interviewed as part of Complainant’s privacy investigation all confirmed that S1 did not disclose
any information about Complainant’s surgery or any other confidential medical information to
them. Instead, the Agency stated, they learned of Complainant’s surgery from Complainant
sharing the information directly. The Agency noted Complainant admitted in her testimony that
she told at least one coworker that she was going to have surgery, but it had been canceled. The
Agency concluded that Complainant did not show that S1 improperly disclosed her confidential
medical information. The Agency stated even if it credited Complainant’s version of the
incident and assumed that others overheard the statement, of which it stated there was no
evidence, the vague reference allegedly made by S1 did not disclose confidential medical
information.
                                                 6                                      2022000232


Regarding claim 3, the Agency noted the Commission has held that allegations that the Privacy
Act has been violated were not within the purview of the EEOC Regulations, without a further
allegation that the Privacy Act violation resulted from prohibited discrimination. The Agency
stated that Complainant did not provide evidence of discriminatory animus due to her disability,
and the privacy investigation determined that the two coworkers who accessed her records did so
to find out when she would be out for surgery, and because one of them did not want to work
when Complainant was working. The Agency found no indication and no evidence was
provided by Complainant of any discriminatory motivation or wrongdoing beyond the Privacy
Act violation.

Regarding claim 12, the Agency stated there was no indication of any alleged “resistance” from
Complainant’s coworkers during the Privacy Investigation, or that even if accepted as true, any
such resistance was based on discriminatory animus. The Agency noted S1 promptly reported
Complainant’s concern that her privacy had been violated to the Privacy Office, a privacy
investigation was conducted, and all the employees Complainant identified as potentially
accessing her medical records were interviewed, and two employees were identified as having
improperly accessed her records. The Agency noted those employees were subsequently
disciplined and ordered to retake privacy training. The Agency stated there was no evidence that
the failure to take other disciplinary measures was due to discriminatory animus.

Regarding the hostile work environment claim, the Agency stated even accepting Complainant’s
allegations as true, she has presented no evidence she was singled out for treatment based on her
disability. The Agency noted Witness 1, who has not worked for the Agency since 2018,
provided only a vague statement that S1 allegedly told him Complainant was having “mental
issues,” which was contradicted by S1’s testimony. The Agency stated S1 was unaware
Complainant had a disability, and although she noted Complainant had taken bereavement leave
after the death of a parent, to S1’s knowledge, it was not related to any mental or other disability.
The Agency noted Witness 2’s statement gave no indication of S1 having discriminatory animus
against Complainant based on her disability. The Agency noted that both witnesses expressed
personal complaints about S1, rendering their statements less credible. The Agency found
Complainant failed to show that she was subjected to unlawful harassment based on her
disability.

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
                                               7                                    2022000232

parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

At the outset, we find the Agency’s dismissal of the claim that Complainant was accused of
engaging in harassing behavior by a coworker was proper. We note that the accusation that
Complainant was harassing another individual does not constitute an injury to a term, condition,
or privilege of appellant's employment. The Commission has held the processing of a complaint
by an employee, wherein the employee challenges the filing of an EEO complaint by a coworker
or other agency employee, would have a chilling effect on the filing of EEO complaints by
aggrieved persons. See Blinco v. Department of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05940194
(May 26, 1994).

Upon review, the Commission finds that the investigative record in this case is inadequate.
Therefore, the Commission cannot make a reasoned determination on the merits of the
complaint. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) and EEO MD-110, Ch. 6 §I, requires
agencies to develop an impartial and complete factual record. An appropriate factual record is
one that allows a reasonable factfinder to draw conclusions as to whether discrimination
occurred. Id. An investigator must be thorough. “This means identifying and obtaining all
relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome.” Id. at § V.D.
“To ensure a balanced record, it is necessary only to exhaust those sources likely to support the
complainant and the respondent. An investigation conducted in this manner might reveal that
there is ample evidence to support the complainant's claims and no evidence to support the
agency's version of the facts, or vice versa. The best type of investigation allows for
Complainant to provide rebuttal evidence with sufficient time for the investigator to address any
issues raised within the regulatory time frames.” Id.

We note that Complainant identified 18 individuals as witnesses. The EEO Investigator noted
that inclusive of the individuals named by Complainant, there were 22 individuals identified as
witnesses in the investigation. She noted that Witness 1 and Witness 2 were contacted, but had
not provided statements at the time the investigation was completed. We note the record
contains the post-investigation statements from Witness 1 and 2. The EEO Investigator noted
that Witness 3, Witness 4, and Witness 5 were contacted and responded that they did not have
first-hand knowledge of the events. The EEO Investigator noted Witness 6 was contacted on
May 19, 2020, and Witness 6 replied that she had information about event 8. The EEO
Investigator stated that Witness 6 was asked to phone the investigator; however, no phone call
was received by the EEO Investigator. The record is devoid of evidence that the EEO
Investigator followed-up with Witness 6. The EEO Investigator noted that Witness 7 was not
contacted as he was identified as a witness who worked in day surgery and day surgery was not
an accepted incident. The EEO Investigator stated that Witness 8, Witness 9, and Witness 10
were not contacted because they could not be found in the Agency’s Global Address List (GAL)
and could not be identified by the local EEO Office. The record reveals Complainant claimed
that she provided phone numbers for Witness 9 and Witness 10. The record is devoid of
evidence that the EEO Investigator called the phone numbers provided.
                                                 8                                      2022000232

The EEO Investigator noted that Witness 11 (the Privacy Officer) was not contacted because she
has since retired from the Agency and no contact information was provided.

The EEO Investigator stated that Witness 12, Witness 13, Witness 14, Witness 15 (Coworker 4),
Witness 16, Witness 17, Witness 18, and Witness 19 were contacted on May 19, 2020. The EEO
Investigator noted that as of the completion of the investigation, no response had been received
from those witnesses (Witnesses 12 – 19). The record is devoid of evidence that the EEO
Investigator followed-up with these witnesses. We note that Complainant identified Witness 12
and Witness 13 in connection with incident 2. Further, Witness 15 (Coworker 4) was one of the
individuals who was identified in the Privacy Investigation as having improperly accessed
Complainant’s medical records (claim 3). EEO Investigator stated that Witness 20, Witness 21,
and Witness 22 were contacted on May 20, 2020, and as of the completion of the investigation,
no response had been received. The record is devoid of evidence that the EEO Investigator
followed-up with these witnesses.

EEOC Regulations provide that the Agency and an employee of a Federal agency shall produce
such evidence as the investigator deems necessary. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(c)(1). EEOC
Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(c)(3) provides that when:

       the [A]gency against which a complaint is filed, or its employees fails without good
       cause shown to respond fully and in timely fashion to requests for … affidavits … the
       investigator may note in the investigative record that the decisionmaker should, or the
       Commission on appeal, may in appropriate circumstances:

       (i)     draw an adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony of the
               requested witness would have reflected unfavorably on the party refusing to
               provide the requested information;

       (ii)    consider the matters to which the requested information or testimony pertains to
               be established in favor of the opposing party;

       (iii)   exclude other evidence offered by the party failing to produce the requested
               information or witness;

       (iv)    issue a decision fully or partially in favor of the opposing party; or

       (v)     take such other actions as it deems appropriate.

29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(c)(3).
                                               9                                    2022000232

In addition, we note that while S1 was asked in general about confronting Complainant in front
of her peers in May 2018, stating that because the VA canceled her surgery she should go to
another hospital for surgery, we note that S1 was not asked about the November – December
2017 timeframe. Further, S1 was not specifically asked about making the alleged comments in
front of Witness 12 and Witness 13.

Further, we note that S1 provided two letters showing that “Employee 1” was issued a seven-day
suspension for Privacy Act violation and “Employee 2” was issued a one-day suspension for a
Privacy Act violation. We note the record does not indicate the identity of “Employee 1” or
“Employee 2.”

We note that Complainant provided a printout of a list with four columns appearing to show six
individuals accessing her medical records. We note that the list contains the notation
“CPRSChart version 1” for all six individuals. However, we note there is no explanation for
what that notation means. Further, we note that the Privacy Investigation Report noted that
“scheduling information is not located in CPRS therefore accessing this information is not for
scheduling purposes.” Additionally, we find the record does not indicate what specific
information was viewed by Coworker 3 and Coworker 4 who were identified as accessing
Complainant’s medical records.

In its decision, the Agency stated that the Privacy Investigation Report determined that the two
coworkers who inappropriately accessed Complainant’s medical record outside their duties and
responsibilities did so to find out when she would be out for surgery. However, we note the
summary of the Privacy Investigation Report indicated only that Coworker 3 accessed
Complainant’s records to find out when Complainant would be out for surgery; but the report did
not attribute that reason to Coworker 4. The Agency’s decision also stated that all six coworkers
identified confirmed that S1 did not disclose to them any information about Complainant’s
surgery. However, we note that the Privacy Investigation Report did not explicitly state this.
Rather, we note that the report stated: “[Coworker 4] and other employees stated that
[Complainant] mentioned to them that ‘she was having surgery.’” Further, we note that the
record is devoid of an attempt by the EEO Investigator to obtain a statement from Coworker 3,
one of the two individuals who, according to the Privacy Investigation Report, were found to
have improperly accessed Complainant’s medical records. As noted above, the EEO Investigator
stated she did attempt to contact Coworker 4; however, the record was devoid of evidence that
the EEO Investigator followed-up on the request.

We note an investigator must ensure a comprehensive, balanced, and impartial record and
exhaust those sources likely to support a complaint. Here, there is no dispute that the
investigator was only successful in obtaining statements from Complainant and S1 during the
investigation and two witnesses post-investigation. The investigator did not obtain affidavits
from all (or even a majority) of Complainant’s coworkers who were alleged to have relevant
information regarding Complainant’s hostile work environment claim, and the claim that the
confidentiality provisions of the Rehabilitation Act were violated.
                                              10                                   2022000232

This absence of affidavits includes the two individuals who Complainant identified as witnesses
to claims 2 and 3; and the two individuals who were identified in the Privacy Act Report as
having improperly accessed Complainant’s medical records. Further, the investigator failed to
obtain an affidavit from Witness 6 who had informed the investigator that she had information
relevant to event 8. Based on the foregoing, we find that the record before us is inadequate for
us to issue a determination on the merits of Complainant's complaint. Cary R. v. U.S. Postal
Service, EEOC Appeal No. 0120180002 (September 27, 2019).

Finally, we note that pages 10 and 21 of Complainant’s affidavit are missing. Given our decision
remanding the complaint, we note the investigator shall obtain the missing pages.


                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision dismissing
Complainant’s claim that Complainant was accused of engaging in harassing behavior by a
coworker. We VACATE the remainder of the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the
remainder of Complainant’s complaint in accordance with this decision and the Order herein.

                                           ORDER

Within 120 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
investigation to develop an accurate factual record regarding Complainant’s hostile work
environment claim and her claim that the Agency breached the confidentiality provisions of the
Rehabilitation Act. The Agency shall obtain all relevant evidence to address Complainant’s
claims, including, but not limited to:

   a. The Agency shall ensure that investigator obtains an affidavit from Coworker 3, who was
      identified in the Privacy Report Investigation as accessing Complainant’s medical
      records.

   b. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator makes a follow-up request to Witness 6
      regarding Complainant’s claim that she was accused of sending an email from another
      employee’s email account (claim 8).

   c. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator makes a follow-up request to obtain
      affidavits from Witness 9 and Witness 10.

   d. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains affidavits from Witness 12, Witness
      13, Witness 14, Witness 15 (Coworker 4), Witness16, Witness 17, Witness 18, Witness
      19, Witness 20, Witness 21, and Witness 22, the coworkers who did not respond to the
      investigator's initial requests. These affidavits shall address the extent to which
      Complainant’s confidential medical information was disclosed in the office; whether
      these individuals had any knowledge of harassing behavior towards Complainant in the
                                               11                                   2022000232

       workplace; and if management had any knowledge that Complainant was being subjected
       to harassment.

   e. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains a supplemental affidavit from S1
      regarding claim 2. The supplemental affidavit shall address in part the November –
      December 2017 timeframe and whether S1 made the alleged comments about
      Complainant’s surgery in front of Witness 12 and Witness 13.

   f. The Agency shall ensure the investigator makes a request for pages 10 and 21 of
      Complainant’s affidavit.

   g. The Agency shall disclose the identity of “Employee 1” who was issued a seven-day
      suspension for Privacy Act violation and “Employee 2” who was issued a one-day
      suspension for a Privacy Act violation.

   h. The Agency shall explain in the record what the notation “CPRSChart version 1” means
      in the printout provided by Complainant. Also, the Agency shall indicate in the record
      what specific information was viewed by Coworker 3 and Coworker 4 who were
      identified as accessing Complainant’s medical records.

   i. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains an affidavit from Witness 2 (or that
      Witness 2 affirms the statement already provided).

   j. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains any other affidavits or
      documentation not specifically requested in this Order, and consistent with this opinion,
      which may be relevant in determining the merits of Complainant's complaint.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant with a copy of
the supplemental record and findings. The Complainant may, within 15 days of receipt of the
supplemental record, submit a statement concerning the supplemental record. Thereafter, within
180 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall issue a new final decision.

A copy of the additional evidence obtained pursuant to this Order and a copy of the new final
decision shall be sent to the Compliance Officer as referenced herein.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”
                                                12                                    2022000232

The report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R.
§1614.403(g). Further, the report must include evidence that the directed action has been taken.


            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                               RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision.
                                                 13                                     2022000232

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                               14                                    2022000232

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 3, 2023
Date
