             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Stella B., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                        Kilolo Kijakazi,
                                    Acting Commissioner,
                                Social Security Administration,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022001628

                                 Agency No. KC-21-0243-SSA

                                          DECISION

On February 1, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 31, 2022, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Hearings Customer
Service Representative GS-8, at the Agency’s Hearing Office in Kansas City, Missouri.

On May 17, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the bases of age, disability, and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1.     From February 16, 2021, and continuing, the Supervisor subjected Complainant
              to harassment by giving her an overwhelming number of daily work assignments,
              and daily reviews of her performance.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022001628

       2.      On March 12, 2021, the Supervisor placed Complainant on an Opportunity to
               Perform Successfully (OPS).

       3.      On February 16, 2021, Complainant was required to resume performance of the
               Verbatim Hearing Reporter (VHR) duties from which she had been exempted.

Furthermore, on the face of her formal complaint, Complainant alleged that she had received
“threats of termination,” and that management had done “any and everything within their power
to force [her] into retirement.” In an attachment to her complaint, she reiterated “management
staff has left me with no other recourse, other than to concede to being forced out of my position
and into retirement!”

On June 22, 2021, the Supervisor issued a Proposal to Terminate to Complainant, notifying her
that her employment would be terminated within 30 days of receipt of the Proposal. The
Proposal to Terminate described that Complainant’s performance was unacceptable and that the
Supervisor tried to assist Complainant improve her performance by giving her a “fair share” of
daily work assignments (claim 1) and placing her on an OPS plan (claim 2). Believing that was
being forced to retire, Complainant submitted retirement paperwork on July 27, 2021.

On August 2, 2021, the Agency began its EEO investigation into the formal complaint.
Complainant informed the investigator that she had received a Proposal to Terminate, and that
she believed the Supervisor had “set her up” for “forced” retirement by giving her an
“overwhelming [number of] daily tasks” (claim 1) and placing her on an OPS plan (claim 2).

By memorandum dated August 6, 2021, the Supervisor notified Complainant that he had made
the decision to terminate her employment with the Agency effective August 6, 2021. However,
the Supervisor sent Complainant an email afterward to inform her that he rescinded his decision
because she filed retirement paperwork in July. Complainant’s representative forwarded the
memorandum and email to the investigator and reiterated that the Agency’s actions had “forced”
Complainant into “involuntary retirement.”

The investigation was concluded on October 1, 2021. There is no indication in the record that the
Agency accepted Complainant’s constructive discharge claim as part of her original complaint or
as an amendment to it. Therefore, it does not appear as part of the report of investigation.

The Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her
right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did
not request an EEOC hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the
Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), with appeal rights to this
Commission. The decision concluded that no discrimination was established as alleged. The
Agency’s final decision did not address Complainant’s constructive discharge claim.

Complainant appealed the Agency’s decision to the Commission. She did not submit a brief or
statement with her appeal.
                                                3                                    2022001628

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Although Complainant’s retirement from the Agency was not effective at the time she filed her
formal EEO complaint, on the face of that complaint, Complainant alleged that she had received
“threats of termination,” and that management had done “any and everything within their power
to force [her] into retirement.” In an attachment to her complaint, she reiterated “management
staff has left me with no other recourse, other than to concede to being forced out of my position
and into retirement!” Once the Agency’s investigation of her complaint was underway,
Complainant notified the investigator that she had been served with a notice of proposed removal
and that she believed she was being set up for a “forced retirement.” The record shows that the
proposal to remove Complainant was rescinded once she initiated the retirement process.

However, despite Complainant’s repeated and clear allegations of a discriminatory constructive
discharge, the Agency did not accept the claim as an amendment to her original complaint, did
not investigate the claim, and did not address it in its final decision. The Agency erred in not
doing so. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(d) provides that a complainant may amend a complaint at any
time prior to the conclusion of the investigation to include issues or claims like or related to
those raised in the complaint. Here, the constructive discharge claim, which Complainant
expressly raised during the EEO investigation, was clearly like or related to the issues raised in
her original complaint and should have been accepted by the Agency as an amendment and
investigated.

Inasmuch as the Agency did not properly process Complainant’s complaint, the Commission has
determined that the final agency decision should be vacated, and the complaint should be
remanded to the Agency for a supplemental investigation on the constructive discharge claim
and issuance of a new final agency decision with appropriate appeal rights. In doing so, we note
that the constructive discharge claim is most likely a “mixed case complaint” claim stemming
from an action that is appealable to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB). See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.302(a)(1). Issues concerning termination and discharge, including allegations of
constructive discharge, are matters ordinarily under the jurisdiction of the MSPB. See DeMuse v.
United States Postal Service, EEOC Request No. 01950324. Therefore, the Agency should
include appeal rights to the MSPB when it issues its new final decision on this matter.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, the Agency’s final decision is VACATED and the complaint is
REMANDED for further processing in accordance with the Order below.

                                            ORDER

The Agency is ordered to take the following actions:

   1. The Agency shall ensure that its investigator completes a supplemental investigation into
      the constructive discharge claim within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision
                                                4                                     2022001628

       is issued. The supplemental investigation shall include affidavits from Complainant and
       relevant Agency officials, as well as all documentation related to Complainant’s
       resignation from employment and any other related documentation.

    2. The Agency shall issue Complainant a copy of the new Report of Investigation that
       includes all matters in Complainant's ongoing harassment claim, including the claim of
       constructive discharge.

    3. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the issuance of the new Report of Investigation, the
       Agency shall issue a new final decision on all of Complainant's ongoing harassment
       allegations, including the constructive discharge claim, that includes a notice of
       Complainant's appeal rights to the MSPB (not EEOC) in accordance with 29 C.F.R.
       §1614.302(d)(3). 2 A copy of the final report of investigation, as well as the new final
       agency decision, must be sent to the Compliance Officer as referenced below.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.



2
  In the event that the MSPB dismisses the matter for lack of jurisdiction, the Agency is
reminded that it must “unmix” the matter and resume processing the entire complaint, including
the constructive discharge claim, from the point where processing ceased. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.302(c)(2)(ii).
                                                5                                     2022001628

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                                RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request.
                                                 6                                      2022001628

Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 26, 2023
Date
