             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Jarvis R., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                        Bill Nelson,
                                       Administrator,
                       National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                 (Langley Research Center),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2022003578

                               Hearing No. 430-2022-00059X

                             Agency No. NCN-19-LARC-00207

                                         DECISION

On June 16, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
May 19, 2022, final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Senior Programmer
with the staffing firm, Science Systems and Application, Inc. (SSAI) at the Agency’s NASA
Langley Research Center (LaRC) facility in Hampton, Virginia.

On October 3, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the basis of sex (male) when:

    1. On March 27, 2019, SSAI terminated Complainant’s employment.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022003578

On March 25, 2020, the Agency dismissed the complaint for failure to state a claim because it
did not, under common law, employ or jointly employ Complainant. On April 15, 2020,
Complainant appealed the Agency’s procedural dismissal of his complaint to the Commission. In
EEOC Appeal No. 2020003134 (Oct. 15, 2020), the Commission vacated the dismissal because
there was insufficient evidence to decide on the issue of joint employment. In its decision, the
Commission remanded the complaint and ordered the Agency to investigate the joint
employment issue and then accept the complaint or issue another final agency decision (FAD)
dismissing it for lack of standing. After conducting a limited supplemental investigation, the
Agency again dismissed the complaint on December 11, 2020, for lack of standing, finding that
the limited supplemental investigation did not find sufficient evidence to suggest that the Agency
was a joint employer for the Complainant.

On December 29, 2020, the Complainant filed another appeal contesting the Agency’s December
11, 2020, procedural dismissal. On June 28, 2021, the Commission reversed the Agency’s Final
Agency Decision dismissing the complaint finding that the Agency was a joint employer for the
Complainant with Science Systems and Applications, Inc. (SSAI) and ordered the Agency to
conduct a full supplemental investigation on the merits of the complaint. EEOC Appeal No.
2021001448.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely
requested a hearing. Over Complainant's objections, the AJ assigned to the case granted the
Agency’s April 13, 2022, motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision without a
hearing on May 3, 2022. The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s
finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as
alleged.

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant filed a brief in support of his appeal. The
Agency did not file anything on appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).
                                                 3                                     2022003578


Summary Judgment

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
We carefully reviewed the record and find that it is adequately developed.

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding
that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). At the summary
judgment stage, the judge must believe the non-moving party’s evidence and must draw
justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one
that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S.
317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A
“material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a case. To successfully oppose a
decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of record that are in dispute
or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute.

Here, Complainant alleges that there is a genuine issue of material fact because he disagrees with
the description of an event listed in the background section of the Agency’s Motion for Summary
Judgment. See Hearing Documents at 727. More specifically, Complainant argues that the fourth
event listed in the background section is missing relevant information regarding the timing of his
termination. Complainant alleges that the missing information would provide evidence on
NASA’s and SSAI’s decision to keep Complainant on PTO until his termination which he
believes prevented him from defending himself against the charges at the time they occurred. See
Hearing Documents at 822. While Complainant’s assertion may be true, there is no evidence to
suggest that this is a material fact that has the potential to affect the outcome of this case.

For the reasons discussed below, we find that, even construing any inferences raised by the
undisputed facts in favor of Complainant, a reasonable factfinder could not find in his favor.

New Claims on Appeal

In the Complainant’s appeal statement, he asserts, for the first time, claims beyond those listed in
his formal complaint or filings at the hearing stage. More specifically, he insists that the EEOC
should investigate NASA on their actions during March 2019 and throughout this EEOC case.
See Complainant’s Appeal Statement at 6. However, the Commission has held that it is not
appropriate for a complainant to raise new claims for the first time on appeal. See Hubbard v.
Dep't of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 01A40449 (Apr. 22, 2004). Should he wish to
pursue these new claims, Complainant is advised to contact an EEO Counselor to initiate the
administrative process.

In his statement, Complainant also alleges, for the first time, that in addition to sex
discrimination, he believes that his termination was, in part, based on reprisal. See
Complainant’s Appeal Statement.
                                                4                                    2022003578

The Commission has found that it is not appropriate to raise a new basis for the first time on
appeal, absent a compelling reason, because allowing a complainant to raise a basis not presented
to the agency at some point prior to its final determination would thwart the investigative
process. See Valdez v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A00196 (May 11, 2000).

Therefore, we decline to address Complainant’s newly raised claim or basis for discrimination in
this decision.

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). He must generally establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he was
subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference
of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). The burden then
shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its actions. Tex.
Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981). Once the agency has met its
burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s articulate reason is pretextual and that the
agency instead acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509
U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

Indicators of pretext include, but are not limited to, discriminatory statements or past personal
treatment attributable to those responsible for the personnel action that led to the filing of the
complaint, comparative or statistical data revealing differences in treatment across various
protected-group lines, unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard
procedures without explanation or justification, or inadequately explained inconsistencies in the
evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12,
2015). At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency's reasons were not the real reasons and that the
Agency acted on the basis of discriminatory animus.

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where, like here, the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions, 2 the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of
Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983).

Complainant argues that his termination was based on sex because the NASA Branch Director
concluded that Complainant displayed aggressive and threatening behavior against a female


2
    See Hearing Documents at 733-737.
                                                  5                                      2022003578

colleague “simply because she stated so.” See Complainant’s Appeal Statement at 2.
Complainant further argues that there were no witnesses during their interaction so management
is engaging in sex discrimination because if “a female, accusing a male, then it must be true.” Id.
In response, the Agency denied Complainant’s allegations and stated that its nondiscriminatory
reason for terminating him was based on his history of poor interactions with NASA and SSAI
employees, unproductive and unprofessional communication, and disrupting meetings.

To support its nondiscriminatory reasons for termination, the Agency cites several instances
where Complainant’s behavior was unproductive and unprofessional and negatively affected
others or their ability to work. See Hearing Document at 733-737. In response to the Agency’s
nondiscriminatory reasons, the Complainant suggests that the Agency’s management official that
supported the termination action only provided SSAI with negative information about his past
behavior and performance appraisals. However, in doing this, Complainant fails to provide any
evidence to suggest that his history of negative behavior or the comments on his performance
appraisal are not true.

In fact, in his appeal statement, the Complainant even quotes the female colleague that was
involved in the interaction that started the investigation that led to his termination, in an attempt
to dispute the Agency’s motive. In her statement, she says, “I know that historically he has bad
behavior and I have witnessed this bad behavior with other[s] so I do not believe the behavior
would have changed.” See Remand ROI at 119-120. This statement does not provide the support
Complainant believes it does. Instead, this statement provides support for the Agency’s stated
nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s termination. It not only addresses his past bad
behavior, but also states that it was not likely for him to change, had he continued to work.
Nonetheless, Complainant has failed to prove that the explanation for his termination is pretext
or that his sex, and not his behavior, played any role in the Agency and contracting company’s
decision to terminate him.

In his appeal, Complainant alleges that the contracting company’s stated reason for his
termination – gross misconduct and violation of SSAI’s Workplace Violence Prevention and
Policy – is pretextual. The Complainant argues that because the female colleague only stated that
she “felt threatened” by the interaction and that she did not state that it was a real “threat” that he
did not violate the policy and should not have been terminated. However, a review of SSAI’s
policy indicates that intimidation, verbal abuse, and “other threatening behavior that occurs in
the workplace” are all covered under the policy and subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination. See Remand ROI at 181. Thus, even if Complainant was relying on the
contracting company’s stated reason for his termination to implicate the Agency as a joint
employer for pretext, it is not supported by any evidence. Without any evidence that suggests
discrimination on the basis of sex was a motivating factor in terminating Complainant, instead of
his well cited performance and behavior concerns, the Commission finds that the Agency’s
reasoning has not been established as pretext.
                                                  6                                 2022003578


                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the arguments on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final order adopting the AJ’s decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                7                                     2022003578

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 23, 2023
Date
