             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Dudley H., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                        Janet L. Yellen,
                                           Secretary,
                                  Department of the Treasury
                                  (Internal Revenue Service),
                                            Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2019005559

                                Hearing No. 530-2015-00049X

                                  Agency No. IRS-14-0027-F

                                          DECISION

Following its September 3, 2019 final order, the Agency filed a timely appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission) pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.403(a). On appeal, the Agency requests that the Commission affirm its rejection of an
EEOC Administrative Judge’s (AJ’s) finding of discrimination in violation of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. The Agency also
requests that the Commission affirm its rejection of the relief ordered by the AJ. For the
following reasons, the Commission MODIFIES the Agency’s final order.

                                    ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are whether the AJ abused her discretion when she issued a default
judgment as a sanction against the Agency; and whether Complainant established race
discrimination under disparate impact and/or disparate treatment theories of discrimination when
the Agency rescinded Complainant’s tentative offer of employment.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                  2019005559

                                          BACKGROUND

Complainant stated that on April 14, 2012, he applied for the position of Internal Revenue Agent
under Job Announcement Number 12PH2-SBX0188-0512-5T11/Control Number 313772500.
Report of Investigation (ROI) at 127. On July 26, 2012, Complainant received an email
containing a conditional offer and instructions for the next steps, which included a pre-
employment background check. ROI at 146-53. In his Declaration for Employment form (Form
306), Complainant checked that he was currently under charges for violations of the law.
Complainant included an explanation that he was “falsely accused of engaging in an attempted
sexual assault,” and that his trial was pending. ROI at 159-60.

On August 15, 2012, the Agency withdrew Complainant’s conditional offer based on the results
of his pre-employment background information, in which issues were identified that could not be
mitigated. ROI at 191. On May 19, 2014, all charges against Complainant were dismissed and
expunged. ROI at 203-4.

EEO Complaint

On February 21, 2014, 2 Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
him to discrimination, based on disparate treatment and disparate impact, due to his race (African
American), age (45), 3 and disability when the conditional job offer, he had accepted in July 2012
for the position of Internal Revenue Agent, GS-0512-11, was rescinded on August 15, 2012, due
to issues involving his pre-employment background information.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the ROI
and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC AJ. Complainant timely requested a
hearing.

The AJ issued a Discovery Order on March 23, 2017. On September 12, 2017, she issued an
Amended Discovery Order. On November 17, 2017, Complainant filed three motions, including
a motion to sanction the Agency for violation of the AJ’s September 12, 2017, Amended
Discovery Order.

On February 14, 2018, the AJ issued an Order on Discovery and Sanctions Motions. The AJ
denied Complainant’s sanctions motion, finding that the Agency’s responses were not deficient.
However, the AJ found that Complainant’s disparate-impact claim had not been investigated and
ordered the Agency to conduct an expedited supplemental investigation on the claim.



2
  Complainant initially filed a mixed-case appeal with the Merit Systems Protection Board on
September 13, 2012, which issued a final order on September 23, 2013, dismissing his appeal for
lack of jurisdiction. Complainant subsequently initiated the instant EEO complaint.
3
    In his affidavit, Complainant withdrew his age claim. ROI at 136.
                                               3                                    2019005559

On July 17, 2018, the AJ issued a Second Amended Discovery Order providing the parties with
60 days to complete discovery on the disparate impact claim.

On September 11, 2018, Complainant filed a Motion to Compel. The AJ ordered the Agency to
file a response within ten days.

On September 20, 2018, the Agency submitted its response to Complainant’s Motion to Compel,
asserting that it complied with its discovery obligations and disputing Complainant’s allegation
that it engaged in abusive tactics when he was unable to open an attachment provided by the
Agency. Regarding Complainant’s request for detailed criminal information, the Agency stated
that it had identified 178 applicants (Complainant and 177 other applicants) in 2012 who had
“criminal issues” revealed in their pre-employment background checks.

On October 9, 2018, the AJ issued an Order Requiring Clarification on Agency’s Response to
Complainant’s Motion to Compel Discovery. As an initial matter, the AJ found that
Complainant’s inability to open the attachment was not a deliberate and dilatory act by the
Agency. The AJ noted that, while the Agency began to explain the process of identifying the race
information of the relevant 178 applicants, it was unclear if that information had been
determined. She ordered the Agency to provide clarification on this inquiry. The AJ also noted
that discovery should be limited to 2012 applicants.

On October 18, 2018, the Agency responded that it had been able to identify the race information
of some of the 178 applicants, and provided a spreadsheet with their race information, if known;
the crimes for which the applicants were arrested or convicted; and the Personnel Security’s
recommendation of approval or disapproval (October 18, 2018, spreadsheet). On October 25,
2018, the AJ issued an order requiring additional documentation from the Agency; specifically,
the “Optional Form 306” for the 177 applicants, other than Complainant, whose pre-employment
background checks revealed criminal issues.

On December 4, 2018, the AJ issued a Notice of Proposed Summary Judgment and Leave for
Complainant to File Motion for Default Judgment. Both parties filed their responses on February
28, 2019. Complainant sought summary judgment in his favor and a default judgment as a
sanction. The Agency argued that a summary judgment decision should be granted in its favor,
and that there was no basis for granting a default judgment because it had complied with its
discovery obligations in good faith and had substantively complied with the AJ’s orders. On
March 22, 2019, the Agency filed its opposition to Complainant’s motion for a default judgment.

On July 26, 2019, the AJ issued a decision granting sanctions against the Agency in the form of a
default judgment for Complainant’s disparate-impact claim and granting summary judgment in
Complainant’s favor on his disparate treatment claim. Regarding the default judgment, the AJ
noted that the Agency had identified 178 applicants with criminal issues in 2012, while in each
subsequent year, it identified approximately 10 to 18 times that number. The AJ agreed with
Complainant’s contention that “[t]he Agency’s own data demonstrates, beyond peradventure, the
inadequacy of the information provided in response to Complainant’s legitimate discovery
                                                4                                     2019005559

request.” In addition, the AJ found that the Agency’s assertions that it was unable to provide the
race information for all 177 applicants (other than Complainant) was inconsistent with testimony
that the Agency routinely collects racial demographic information. The AJ concluded that the
Agency’s failure to satisfactorily respond to Complainant’s discovery requests, even when
limited to only providing 2012 data, supported a default judgment for Complainant.

For the disparate impact claim, the AJ noted that the Agency alleged that Complainant failed to
identify a neutral policy or practice, but that a prima facie case of disparate impact “can and
must, be established by adverse inference,” citing Gennetten v. Department of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 01973098 (November 24, 1999). The AJ noted that, as in Gennetten, the Agency was
on notice to retain all relevant records once Complainant set forth his disparate-impact claim.
The Agency argued that the labor-intensive process of manually reviewing fingerprint results for
each applicant ultimately identified 178 applicants (including Complainant) in 2012 whose pre-
employment background check revealed criminal issues. However, the AJ found that 72
applicants, or 40.4% had no identifier of race. As such, the AJ drew an adverse inference against
the Agency and found that this data, had it been available, would have permitted Complainant to
establish a prima facie case of race discrimination under a disparate-impact theory.

The AJ also found that Complainant had established a prima facie case of disparate treatment
and that a “proper comparator” was a “non-African American applicant for employment who,
notwithstanding having a criminal arrest record or even conviction of a crime, was nevertheless
hired for the position.” The AJ noted that three White applicants were approved for hire, despite
their “concerning criminal histories.” The AJ then found that the Agency failed to articulate
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, and concluded that the Agency was liable
for unlawful race discrimination. The AJ noted that, because Complainant had established
discrimination based on his race, it was not necessary to address his disability discrimination
claim.

Thereafter, the Agency issued a final order declining to fully implement the AJ’s findings of race
discrimination and concurrently appealed the AJ’s decision. Complainant has opposed the
Agency’s appeal.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Agency’s Contentions

On appeal, the Agency asserts that the AJ’s decision to issue sanctions is not warranted because
it responded to all requests for information, as evidenced by the AJ’s prior rulings that indicated
that the Agency had complied. While the Agency concedes that it was unable to identify the race
information for 72 out of the 178 applicants, the Agency notes that it is undisputed that 58 did
not have “criminal issues” and should not have been considered in the applicant pool. Of the
remaining 14 applicants, only two were disapproved for hire. The Agency asserts that these two
applicants, whose races were unknown, were the only applicants who would be relevant in
determining whether the Agency’s failure to hire applicants with criminal histories had a
                                                  5                                     2019005559

disproportionate impact based on race, and that its inability to identify the race of these two
applicants cannot be said to be a failure sufficient to justify issuing sanctions in this matter, much
less a sanction as severe as a default judgment.

The Agency argues that the AJ did not consider the relevant factors to determine whether
sanctions were appropriate. Specifically, the Agency asserts that the AJ never addressed the
factors related to a prejudicial effect on Complainant; consequences of any delay of justice; or
the effect on the integrity of the EEO process. The Agency further argues that the AJ did not
tailor the sanction and adopted the most severe sanction possible. The Agency states that, had the
AJ tailored the sanction, she would have either drawn an adverse inference that the requested
information would have reflected unfavorably on the Agency, or considered the requested
information to be established in favor of Complainant. The Agency argues that, instead of
engaging in this analysis and narrowly tailoring her sanction, the AJ issued a decision by default,
which was unnecessarily severe and an abuse of discretion. The Agency requests that the
Commission vacate the default judgment.

The Agency further argues that Complainant did not establish a prima case of race discrimination
under a disparate-impact theory. The Agency states that Complainant did not identify a neutral
policy or practice, and that it does not have a policy or practice of summarily excluding
applicants with criminal records. Rather, the Agency conducts pre-employment checks on all
applicants who have received conditional offers of employment, and during these background
checks, if a criminal issue or other potential disqualifying issue is identified, the Agency
performs a suitability determination by relying on the criteria established by the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM). The Agency argues that the AJ erred when she found “no need
to address” the fact that Complainant did not identify a neutral policy or practice. The Agency
asserts that the AJ’s reliance on Gennetten is inapposite because the complainant in that case had
properly identified a neutral policy. The Agency argues that Complainant did not establish a
prima facie case of disparate impact and that the AJ’s decision should be reversed.

The Agency next asserts that the AJ erred in finding that Complainant established a prima facie
case of race discrimination under a disparate treatment theory. While the AJ identified three
White comparators, the Agency argues that they were not similarly situated because there was no
evidence that they held the same position sought by Complainant, and their criminal cases had
been resolved, while Complainant’s case was pending at the time he was seeking employment
with the Agency. In addition, the Agency states that the AJ should have found that the Agency
was able to demonstrate that its decision to rescind Complainant’s conditional offer of
employment due to his pending criminal issues was job-related and consistent with business
necessity. Further, the Agency contends that the AJ should have considered the following
factors: (1) the nature and gravity of the offense or conduct; (2) the time that has passed since the
offense or conduct and/or completion of the sentence; and (3) the nature of the job held or
sought.

The Agency argues that the AJ rejected the Agency’s legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for
its hiring decision without any analysis, and simply stated that the reason was “woefully lacking
                                                6                                    2019005559

and insufficient,” without providing some basis for her findings, other than an unsupported
conclusion. The Agency asserts that, at the time that Complainant sought employment, there was
“no final disposition” on the charges against him. The Agency argues that the AJ should have
found that the Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for rescinding its
conditional offer of employment to Complainant, and that Complainant failed to rebut its reason.

The Agency requests that the Commission find that the AJ erred when granting a sanction
against the Agency in the form of a default judgment for the disparate impact claim, and in
issuing a decision in favor of Complainant on summary judgment regarding his disparate
treatment claim. The Agency requests that the AJ’s decision be reversed.

Complainant’s Contentions

Complainant asserts that the Agency repeatedly attempted to thwart his efforts to obtain basic
discovery and that the AJ took necessary action to protect the integrity of the EEO process and
deter the Agency from engaging in similar conduct. Complainant argues that the Agency is
attempting to use “spin tactics,” such as using the AJ’s comments during the discovery phase of
Complainant’s disparate treatment phase, to attack her default judgment on the disparate-impact
claim.

Complainant states that, on November 20, 2018, the Agency submitted the Form 306 for the 177
applicants in 2012 whose pre-employment background checks revealed criminal issues.
Complainant stated that, upon review of the forms, he determined that 58 of the 177 cases had no
“criminal issues.” Complainant asserts that, on November 30, 2018, in its Response to
Complainant’s Supplement to Complainant’s Pre-Hearing Statement, the Agency “conceded that
its prior discovery responses were false.” Complainant argues that sanctions are appropriate
because the Agency failed to respond fully and in a timely fashion.

Regarding the disparate impact claim, Complainant asserts that he identified the Agency’s
neutral policy of “summary disbarment where criminal charges remain pending against an
applicant.” Complainant argues that the AJ cited to the proper legal standard and points raised in
Complainant’s Motion for Summary Judgment to reject the Agency’s contentions on this issue.
For the disparate-treatment claim, Complainant states that the AJ reasoned, unchallenged by the
Agency, that convicted criminals received more favorable treatment than Complainant, who was
an innocent man who was wrongly accused. Complainant also notes that the October 18, 2018
spreadsheet shows applicants without dispositions of their criminal activity. Complainant
requests that the Commission affirm the AJ’s decision.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that
                                                 7                                     2019005559

a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other
words, we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and the Agency’s,
factual conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment
discrimination statute was violated. See id. at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo
standard of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions
of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

Decision Without a Hearing

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding
that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision
without a hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed.
R. Civ. P. 56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge
determines no genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards.
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment
motion, the judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to
weighing the evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the
non-moving party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s
favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for
the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip.
Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the
outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
To successfully oppose a decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of
record that are in dispute or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute. Here,
both parties asserted, and we so find, that there are no material facts in dispute. As such, a
decision without a hearing was appropriate.

Default Judgment

The Commission’s regulations afford broad authority to AJs for the conduct of hearings. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.109 et seq.; EEO MD-110 at Chap. 7, § III(D). An AJ has inherent powers to
conduct a hearing and to issue appropriate sanctions, including a default judgment. See id.;
Matheny v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Request No. 05A30373 (Apr. 21, 2005); Rountree v. Dep’t
                                                8                                     2019005559

of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 07A00015 (July 17, 2001). Discretionary abuse occurs when
a judge issues a sanction despite the Agency’s demonstration of good cause for its actions and its
reasonable efforts to comply with a discovery order. Steen v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal
No. 07A20033 (Jun. 3, 2003).

Here, the AJ issued a default judgment as a sanction against the Agency for the disparate-impact
claim because she found that the Agency failed to satisfactorily respond to Complainant’s
discovery requests, even when limited to only providing 2012 data. However, we find that the AJ
abused her discretion because the Agency demonstrated good cause for its actions and its
reasonable efforts to comply with the AJ’s orders for the disparate impact claim. We note that on
February 14, 2018, the AJ denied Complainant’s request for sanctions, determining that the
Agency’s responses to discovery were not deficient, and ordered the Agency to conduct an
investigation on the disparate impact claim, extending the deadline for the investigation on July
17, 2018.

On September 11, 2018, the AJ ordered the Agency to respond to Complainant’s Motion to
Compel within 10 days, to which the Agency timely filed its response on September 20, 2018.
On October 9, 2018, the AJ issued an order for the Agency to provide clarification of its prior
response. The AJ noted that the Agency timely submitted its response. Regarding the AJ’s
October 25, 2018, order to produce copies of the Form 306 for the 177 applicants, the Agency
stated that it submitted the forms on November 20, 2018. Complainant acknowledged that he
had reviewed these forms. As such, we find that the Agency complied with the AJ’s orders.

To the extent that the Agency did not provide the race data of the other 177 applicants, the AJ
credited Complainant’s argument rejecting the Agency’s assertion that it had no way of
identifying the race information of the 177 applicants that submitted the Form 306 information.
Complainant argued that this assertion was inconsistent with the Agency’s routine collection of
racial demographic information, as set forth in the declaration provided by a Supervisory
Personnel Security Specialist (SPSS). However, a review of SPPS’s statement shows that he
repeatedly stated the opposite. For example, SPSS stated, “we do not maintain race and disability
information on applicants we prescreen,” and “we also do not maintain data on the race and
disability status of those whose conditional offers were rescinded.” ROI at 523. In addition, the
Agency asserted that disclosure is voluntary and that it had manually reviewed the criminal
records to obtain an applicant’s race information, where available.

While it is not clear why the number of applicants with criminal issues in 2012 was significantly
lower than other years, there is no evidence that the Agency inappropriately withheld any data.
Although Complainant alleges that the Agency “conceded that its prior discovery responses were
false” in its November 30, 2018, Response to Complainant’s Supplement to Complainant’s Pre-
Hearing Statement, we find that the Agency made no such admission.

We further note that the Commission has held that sanctions, while corrective, also can prevent
similar misconduct in the future and must be tailored to each situation, applying the least-severe
sanction necessary to respond to the party’s failure to show good cause for its actions, as well as
                                                9                                    2019005559

to equitably remedy the opposing party. See Gray v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 07A50030
(Mar. 1, 2007); Rountree v Dep’t of the Treasury, supra; Hale v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal
No. 01A03341 (Dec. 8, 2000). The factors pertinent to “tailoring” a sanction, or determining
whether a sanction is, in fact, warranted, include: (1) the extent and nature of the non-
compliance, including the justification presented by the non-complying party; (2) the prejudicial
effect of the non-compliance on the opposing party; (3) the consequences resulting from the
delay in justice, if any; and (4) the effect on the integrity of the EEO process. Gray v. Dep’t of
Def., supra; Royal v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25,
2009). Here, we find that the Agency correctly noted that the AJ did not consider these factors
when issuing the sanction of a default judgment, and she did not issue the least severe sanction.

Based on the specific circumstances of this case, we find that the AJ abused her discretion when
she sanctioned the Agency with a default judgment. See Embrey v. Dep’t of Housing and Urban
Dev., EEOC Appeal No. 07A50009 (Jul. 26, 2005) (the AJ abused her discretion when she
issued a default judgment against an agency, which did not fail to respond to an AJ’s Order nor
fail to respond in a timely fashion, and there was no evidence of any bad faith in the agency’s
responses to the AJ’s orders); request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 05A51207 (Sept. 19,
2005); Voysest v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 01A35340 (Jan. 18, 2005) (the AJ
abused his discretion by issuing a sanction that was not “tailored”).

We find that a more appropriate sanction for the Agency’s failure to provide the race information
for the 177 applicants in 2012 is to draw an adverse inference regarding any relevant missing
race information and consider that the requested information would have reflected unfavorably
on the Agency. Accordingly, we will modify the Agency’s final order regarding the sanction
against the Agency on the disparate impact claim.

Disparate Impact

To establish a prima facie case of disparate impact, a complainant must show that an agency
practice or policy, while neutral on its face, disproportionately impacted members of the
protected class. This is demonstrated through the presentation of statistical evidence that
establishes a statistical disparity that is linked to the challenged practice or policy. Watson v.
Fort Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U.S. 977, 994 (1988) (complainant must present “statistical
evidence of a kind and degree sufficient to show that the practice in question has caused the
exclusion.”). Specifically, a complainant must: (1) identify the specific practice or practices
challenged; (2) show statistical disparities; and (3) show that the disparity is linked to the
challenged practice or policy. Id. The burden is on a complainant to show that “the facially
neutral standard in question affects those individuals [within the protected group] in a
significantly discriminatory pattern.” Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321, 329 (1977); see also
Complainant v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03990119 (Aug. 31, 2000).

We find that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of disparate impact. Complainant
alleges that he identified the Agency’s neutral policy of “summary disbarment where criminal
charges remain pending against an applicant.” Assuming, for the purpose of analysis and without
                                                10                                     2019005559

so finding, that the Agency had such a policy, we find that Complainant did not show statistical
disparities to establish that members of his protected class were disproportionately affected by
the Agency’s policy.

The AJ found that an adverse inference of missing race information for 72 applicants established
a prima facie case of disparate impact. However, we note that it is undisputed that 58 of these 72
applicants did not have criminal issues. Rather, they largely had issues related to outstanding
debt, and all 58 of these applicants were approved for hire. Of the remaining 14 applicants with
unidentified race, two were disapproved for hire. In addition, three Black applicants were
disapproved for hire. Including Complainant, we find that six applicants comprise the relevant
applicant pool that was allegedly affected by the Agency’s policy. This sample of applicants is
not large enough to show a statistical significance. See Qazi v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal
No. 01941733 (Dec 22, 1994) (finding that a pool of 18 applicants was too small to show
statistical significance); see also Bongiorno v. Def. Logistics Agency, EEOC Appeal No.
01883721 (Feb. 10, 1989) (finding that a sample of 15 is too small to be statistically significant).
Accordingly, we find that Complainant has not established a prima facie case of disparate
impact. We therefore will affirm the Agency’s final order regarding Complainant’s disparate
impact claim.

Disparate Treatment

Generally, claims of disparate treatment are examined under the analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Hochstadt v. Worcester Found. for
Experimental Biology, Inc., 425 F. Supp. 318, 324 (D. Mass.), aff’d, 545 F.2d 222 (1st Cir.
1976). For Complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e.,
that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. Furnco Constr.
Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978); McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13. Once
Complainant has established a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep't. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine,
450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). If the Agency is successful, the burden reverts back to Complainant to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s reason(s) for its action was a
pretext for discrimination. At all times, Complainant retains the burden of persuasion, and it is
his obligation to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a
prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993); U.S. Postal Serv. v.
Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 715-716 (1983).

On appeal, the Agency argued Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of disparate
treatment because the comparators identified by the AJ were not similarly situated in that there
was no evidence that they held the same position sought by Complainant; further, because their
cases were resolved, while Complainant’s case was pending at the time he was seeking
employment with the Agency.
                                                11                                     2019005559

We note that, among other factors, to be considered “similarly situated,” the comparator must be
similar in substantially all aspects, so that it would be expected that they would be treated in the
same manner. See Grappone v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC No. 01A10667 (Sept. 7, 2001) request
for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 05A20020 (Jan. 28, 2002).

In her decision, the AJ found “a proper comparator to be a non-African American applicant for
employment who, notwithstanding having a criminal arrest record or even conviction of a crime,
was nevertheless hired for the position.” The AJ determined that Complainant had established a
prima facie case of race discrimination based on three White comparators who were hired by the
Agency. The AJ noted that one applicant had a battery conviction, and another had prior
convictions for assault and domestic violence. Decision at 21. However, we find that the AJ
erred in finding that comparators were those with a “criminal arrest record or even conviction of
a crime.” Rather, the appropriate comparators are non-African American applicants with
pending, not past, criminal matters.

While the Agency argued that there was no evidence that the comparators held the same position
sought by Complainant, the Agency did not provide any information related to an applicant’s
position; only information on identified criminal issues and race the 2012 applicants, if known.
We find that the October 18, 2018 spreadsheet shows that there were applicants outside of
Complainant’s protected class who were approved for hire, despite unresolved criminal matters.
As such, we find that Complainant established a prima facie case of race discrimination.

We further find that the AJ erred when she determined that the Agency did not provide
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its action. We note that an employer’s stated legitimate
reason must be reasonably articulated and nondiscriminatory, but it does not have to be a reason
that the trier of fact would act on or approve. See Wrenn v. Gould, 808 F.2d 493 (6th Cir. 1987).
In this case, the Agency proffered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its action. A Human
Resources Specialist (HRS) stated that the Personnel Security Office reviews an applicant’s
information, including the Form 306, to determine suitability for employment. HRS stated that
she was informed on August 15, 2012, that Complainant was not suited for employment and
rescinded his job offer. HRS stated that selectees cannot onboard if they have an open court case.
ROI at 207-8.

A Personnel Security Specialist (PSS) stated that the Agency does not allow applicants to enter
on duty until their fingerprint results and case disposition information are received, having been
favorably adjudicated. PSS noted that a pending charge could result in incarceration or additional
charges, if an individual failed to appear in court, but there were a few exceptions, such as a
court date for a speeding ticket. PSS stated that Personnel Security then use the OPM
characterization chart to grade the criminal charges, with the elapsed time chart being used to
upgrade or downgrade the issues. In addition, PSS stated that a history of an arrest or conviction
does not necessarily result in an applicant not being hired, and that an applicant can reapply once
the pending charges are resolved. ROI at 654-5.
                                                12                                     2019005559

Having found that the Agency met its burden of explanation, the next step is to examine the
evidence for pretext. Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such weaknesses, inconsistencies,
or contradictions in the Agency’s proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. See Opare-Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007) (finding that the agency’s explanations were
confusing, contradictory, and lacking credibility, which were then successfully rebutted by the
complainant), request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520080211 (May 30, 2008). We
find that the Agency’s data shows that the proffered reasons were pretexts for discrimination.

We find that the Agency’s data shows that its proffered reasons for rescinding Complainant’s
condition job offer were pretext for discrimination. The Agency approved applicants with
pending or unresolved criminal matters, which shows that the Agency’s assertion that applicants
with open criminal matters are not hired is not worthy of belief. For example, in the October 18,
2018 spreadsheet, the Agency noted that an applicant with an unidentified race (#1208-04725)
had an “active” case related to theft of government property with a trial scheduled for June 18,
2013. In addition, a White applicant (#1209-00298) was arrested for “Larceny/Building” and
another White applicant (#1202-00616) was arrested for “menacing, Refusal to Submit to
Breath/Blood/Urine; and Op Mtr Veh U/Inf Alc/Drugs etc. .08. [operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol/drugs etc. with a blood alcohol content of .08].” While the Agency
did not specify that these two cases were pending matters, the Agency noted that these cases had
“no disposition” and there were no dates for these arrests. We find that the Agency’s notation of
“no disposition,” contradicts the Agency’s claims that it does not allow applicants with “open”
matters to enter on duty, or until case disposition information is received.

We find that that this evidence reflects pretext for discrimination. Complainant therefore has
established that the Agency subjected him to disparate treatment based on race when it rescinded
his tentative offer of employment. Accordingly, we will reverse the Agency’s final order
regarding Complainant’s disparate treatment claim and order the Agency to take further action,
in accordance with the Order of the Commission, below. As Complainant would not be entitled
to any additional remedies, we do not find it necessary to address Complainant’s allegation of
disability discrimination.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we MODIFY the Agency’s final order regarding Complainant’s
allegations that the Agency subjected him to discrimination based on race when it rescinded his
tentative job offer, and we ORDER the Agency to provide the remedies as specified in the Order
herein.

                                             ORDER

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial action:
                                             13                                     2019005559

1. Within 45 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall place
   Complainant into the position of GS-0512-11 Internal Revenue Agent with the Small
   Business/Self Employed Division in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The placement into this
   position shall be retroactive to August 27, 2012, the date Complainant was to report to
   training/duty.

2. Within 60 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall pay
   Complainant backpay, with interest and other benefits due Complainant, pursuant to 29
   C.F.R. § 1614.501. Complainant shall cooperate with the Agency’s efforts to compute the
   amount of back pay and benefits due, and he shall provide all relevant information
   requested by the Agency. If there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of back pay and
   or benefits, the Agency shall issue a check to Complainant for the undisputed amount
   within 60 calendar days of the date the Agency determines the amount it believes to be
   due. Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute.
   The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance Officer,
   at the address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s
   Decision.”

3. After the Agency has calculated and paid Complainant’s backpay award, Complainant
   shall have 60 calendar days following the end of the tax year in which the final payment
   is received to calculate the adverse tax consequences of any lump sum back pay awards,
   if any, and notify the Agency. Following receipt of Complainant’s calculations, the
   Agency shall have 60 calendar days to issue Complainant a check compensating him for
   any adverse tax consequences established, with a written explanation for any amount
   claimed but not paid.

4. Pursuant to section 102(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, a complainant who establishes
   unlawful intentional discrimination under either Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
   (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., may receive compensatory damages
   for past and future pecuniary losses (i.e., out-of-pocket expenses) and non-pecuniary
   losses (e.g., pain and suffering, mental anguish) as part of this “make whole” relief. 42
   U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(3). As such, the Agency is ordered to conduct a supplemental
   investigation regarding any compensatory damages, attorney’s fees, and costs related to
   the Agency’s race discrimination against Complainant when it rescinded his tentative
   offer of employment.

5. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall provide eight
   hours of in-person or interactive EEO training for the responsible Personnel Security
   Specialist(s) who adjudicated Complainant’s case. The training shall emphasize Agency
   officials’ obligation to not discriminate against applicants based on race.

6. Within 60 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall consider
   taking appropriate disciplinary action against these responsible Personnel Security
   Specialist(s). If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it shall identify the action
                                                14                                     2019005559

       taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s)
       for its decision not to impose discipline. If any of the responsible management officials
       have left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of their departure
       date(s).

   7. Within 30 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall post notices in
      accordance with the paragraph below.

                                     POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Small Business/Self Employed Division in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notices, after being signed by the
Agency’s duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic
format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall
remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices
to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said
notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is
to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation
of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period.
The report must be in digital format, and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                  ATTORNEY'S FEES (H0610)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), he/she is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of this decision becoming final. The Agency shall then process the claim for
attorney's fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
                                                15                                    2019005559

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
                                               16                                    2019005559

reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0610)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
                                               17                                    2019005559

the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 31, 2023_
Date
