              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Alfonso T., 1
                                            Complainant,

                                                  v.

                                       Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                            Secretary,
                                      Department of Defense
                            (National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency),
                                             Agency.

                                      Request No. 2022004969

                                      Appeal No. 2021003091

                                   Agency No. NGA-0039-2019

                     DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

The Agency timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in Alfonso T. v. Department of Defense, EEOC Appeal No.
2021003091 (Aug. 17, 2022). EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its
discretion, grant a request to reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will
have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(c). For the reasons that follow, the Agency’s request is DENIED.

Complainant, an Information Technology (IT) Operation Analyst, Pay Band 3, at the Agency's
National Geospatial Agency Operations Center (NOC) in Springfield, Virginia filed an EEO
complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of race (African-
American) and age (56) when on August 5, 2019, he was not promoted to the Pay Band 4 Level.
Complainant stated that he had applied for promotion during four consecutive cycles, but each
time, his bid for promotion had been denied.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                     2022004969

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. Complainant requested an immediate final
decision. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision (FAD)
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Therein, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to
prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2021003091, the Commission reversed the Agency’s decision and found
that Complainant was subjected to discrimination. In so finding, the Commission determined that
the Agency failed to provide a specific, clear, and individualized explanation for Complainant’s
nonselection for promotion, as alleged. The Manager's general statements about the Agency's
promotion selection process supported Complainant's position that he had followed the Agency’s
instructions and guidance on promotions, but the Manager’s statements did not explain why
Complainant was not selected for the position. Further, the Agency did not provide any examples
or specifics as to why any of the promotion panels thought individuals outside Complainant’s race
category, including one trained by Complainant, were better-qualified nor did the Agency provide
evidence to support the promotion panel’s conclusions. Importantly, the Commission noted that
the Promotion Lead, who was obligated to comply with the investigation, did not submit an
affidavit because, she asserted, she was unable to provide any specific testimony regarding the
selection process or decision due to restricted access to reference materials within her office.
Further, there was no indication that any of the promotion panel members for the non-selection at
issue were interviewed by the EEO investigator. Thus, the Commission found that the Agency did
not meet its burden to produce legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions and, therefore,
Complainant had established that he was subjected to discrimination based on race.

In its request for reconsideration, the Agency initially argues that the Promotion Lead, the official
nominally in charge of the promotion process, could not provide an affidavit to the investigator
because she did not have access to the necessary records due to the COVID-19 lockdown protocols
that were in effect at the time. The Agency further contends that, because Complainant requested
a final decision rather than a hearing, it was forced to choose between missing the regulatory
deadline for completing its investigation and issuing a final decision based upon an incomplete
investigative report. In addition, the Agency argued that the Commission failed to follow its own
COVID-19 policy guidance, and that a ruling in Complainant’s favor was tantamount to a default
judgment without just cause. In opposing the Agency’s request, Complainant argues that the
request fails to meet either of the reconsideration criteria.

A request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at 9-18 (Aug. 5,
2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20, 2007).
Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency.
                                                 3                                      2022004969

In its prior decision, the Commission concluded that the Agency failed to provide a specific, clear,
and individualized explanation for Complainant’s nonselection for promotion to Pay Band (4).
We can find no clear error in law or fact with that finding despite the Agency’s assertions to the
contrary.

The Agency did not submit a statement in opposition to Appeal No. 2021003091. All of its
arguments were raised for the first time when it submitted its request for reconsideration. The
Commission has consistently held that arguments raised for the first time on request for
reconsideration cannot be considered at this stage of the proceedings. Zetta B. v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Request No. 2021000986 (Feb. 17, 2021).

We do not believe that, in handling this case, the Agency was limited to the binary choice of either
missing a regulatory deadline or submitting an inadequate investigative report, as it claims in its
request for reconsideration. Nowhere in the FAD does the Agency mention anything about the
pandemic having impacted the investigation or when the lockdown was actually lifted. It is
apparent that the Agency did not hold up its issuance of the FAD before completing its
investigation despite knowing that processing had been suspended on account of the pandemic.
The Agency could easily have reached an agreement with Complainant to hold the processing of
the case in abeyance until such time as the classified information needed to complete the
evidentiary record could be obtained.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
Agency's request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to DENY the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2021003091 remains the
Commission’s decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on a Request to Reconsider. The Agency shall comply with the Order as set forth
below.

                                         ORDER(D0617)

To the extent that it has not already done so, the Agency shall take the following remedial actions:

   1. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall offer
      Complainant, the position of IT Operation Analyst, Pay Band 4 at the NOC or a
      substantially equivalent position. Complainant shall have fifteen (15) days, from the date
      of the offer, to accept or decline the position.

   2. If Complainant should decline the Agency’s offer, the date of his rejection shall be the end
      date for any back pay due Complainant. If Complainant would have received higher pay
      had he been selected for promotion to the IT Operation Analyst, Pay Band 4 at the NOC in
      August 2019, the Agency shall pay Complainant back pay, with interest, from August 5,
      2019, or the date on which it is determined Complainant would have started in that position
      had he received a promotion. The Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back
      pay, with interest, and other benefits due the Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
      1614.501, no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the date this decision was issued.
                                            4                                      2022004969

   Complainant has the duty to cooperate with the Agency in determining back pay, including
   providing evidence/input/documents (including responding to agency requests for
   documentation or completing agency forms). The Agency shall also pay compensation for
   the adverse tax consequences of receiving back pay as a lump sum. Complainant has the
   burden of establishing the amount of increased tax liability, if any. Once the Agency has
   calculated the proper amount of back pay, Complainant shall be given the opportunity to
   present the Agency with evidence regarding the adverse tax consequences, if any, for which
   Complainant shall then be compensated. If there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of
   back pay and/or benefits, the Agency shall issue a check to the Complainant for the
   undisputed amount within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Agency determines the
   amount it believes to be due. The Complainant may petition for enforcement or
   clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be
   filed with the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled
   “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”

3. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
   complete a supplemental investigation concerning Complainant’s entitlement to
   compensatory damages and determine the amount of compensatory damages due
   Complainant in a final decision with appeal rights to the Commission. The Agency shall
   pay this amount to Complainant within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the
   determination of the amount of compensatory damages. If there is a dispute regarding the
   exact amount of compensatory damages, the Agency shall issue a check to Complainant
   for the undisputed amount. Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of
   the amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the
   Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation of
   the Commission’s Decision.”

4. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
   provide eight hours of interactive EEO training to Promotion Lead, the panel members for
   the 2019 promotion panel, and other management officials at the Agency. The required
   training shall address management’s responsibilities with regard to eliminating
   discrimination and reprisal in the workplace. If Promotion Lead or any of the panel
   members for the 2019 promotion panel have left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall
   furnish documentation of the departure dates.

5. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
   consider taking disciplinary action against Promotion Lead and the promotion panel
   members involved in the 2019 promotion panel. The Commission does not consider
   training to be a disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the Commission
   and specify what, if any, action was taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary
   action, then it shall set forth the reasons for its decision not to impose discipline. If
   Promotion Lead and the promotion panel members for the 2019 promotion panel have left
   the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of the departure dates.
                                                  5                                     2022004969

   6. The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the paragraph entitled, “Posting Order.”

   7. The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as
      provided in the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision." The
      report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
      1614.403(g). Further, the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's
      calculation of back pay and other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the
      corrective action has been implemented.

                                   POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Operations Center in Springfield, Virginia, copies of the
attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced,
or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance
Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision,”
within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format,
and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.
                                                   6                                      2022004969

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                           Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


May 3, 2023
Date
