             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Doria R., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                       Martin J. Walsh,
                                          Secretary,
                                     Department of Labor,
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2022001750

                                 Agency No. CRC 21-05-063

                                          DECISION

Complainant appeals to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s final decision dated January 10, 2022, finding no discrimination
concerning her complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following
reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Policy Analyst, GS-
13, with the Agency’s Office of Workers’ Compensation Program, Division of Energy
Employees Occupational Illness Compensation, in Cleveland, Ohio.

On April 27, 2021, Complainant filed her complaint alleging discrimination and harassment in
reprisal for prior EEO activity when:

    1. On October 26, 2020, her supervisor (S1), Supervisory Policy Analyst, rated her Meets
       (“Fully Successful”) on her Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 performance appraisal and failed to
       provide requested supporting documentation in support of the rating.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2022001750

   2. On February 19, 2021, the District Director (DD) excluded her from a communication
      that the DD sent to other employees of the Department of Labor office at 1001 Lakeside
      in Cleveland, Ohio, informing them of a deadline by which they could voluntarily come
      into the office to retrieve personal belongings or to have them shipped to them.

   3. On March 4, 2021, the DD sent an email to her second-level supervisor (S2), the Branch
      Chief of Policy, Regulations and Procedures, asking if Complainant had personal items in
      the office and stating that if Complainant did not come to pick them up within a few days,
      they would be discarded as junk.

   4. On March 8, 2021, her third-level supervisor (S3), the Deputy Director, the Division of
      Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation, called her and told her that her
      move to Florida in November 2020, was not authorized and could result in her
      termination (she was later told that she could remain in her current location, but she was
      required to provide all emails regarding her change of location from Ohio to Florida).

After completion of the investigation of the complaint, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision without a hearing. The Agency issued its final Agency decision concluding that it
asserted legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its action, which Complainant failed to rebut.

Regarding claim 1, the record indicates that on March 20, 2020, Complainant was transferred
from the Agency’s Cleveland District Office as a GS-12, Claims Examiner, to the Agency’s
National Office as a GS-13, Policy Analyst position (her current position). This is not at issue.
S1 stated that since Complainant was new to her position, S1 and a mentor gave her feedback
and guidance in her written work products. S1 noted that Complainant was still learning her
position duties during FY 2020. The record indicates that on May 13, 2020, S1 provided
Complainant with her FY 2020 performance plan. On October 26, 2020, Complainant was
issued a Fully Successful performance appraisal for FY 2020. The highest to lowest ratings
were: Outstanding, Exceeds Fully Successful, Fully Successful, and Unacceptable. S1 stated that
Complainant’s performance was rated under five results elements (policy items, customer
service, accountability review, Director’s Orders and case specific guidance, and policy
specialization). S1 indicated that Complainant’s performance on those elements met a fully
successful level and did not meet an outstanding or exceeds fully successful level.

Specifically, S1 stated that Complainant, while assigned as a co-lead in an accountability review
team, did not attempt to engage in any of the planning or executing of the accountability reviews.
S1 also stated that Complainant’s written work products had factual errors, proofreading and
formatting issues, and required a significant amount of engagement with her and management
before they were ready for formal clearance and signature. S1 noted that Complainant did not
submit a self-assessment of her work performance for FY 2020 and did not submit any written
comments disputing the appraisal. S1 indicated that at the time of the rating, she, as her usual
practice, did not include supporting documentation; rather, she explained to Complainant what
documentation was used and the sources for the rating.
                                               3                                   2022001750

The record reveals that S1 sent emails to Complainant on numerous occasions from April 15
through September 16, 2020, providing feedback, instructions, and case examples, including
Director’s Orders, related to her work.

Regarding claim 2, the DD indicated that she was Complainant’s former second-level supervisor
when Complainant previously worked as a GS-12, Claims Examiner, at the Agency’s Cleveland
District Office prior to moving to her current GS-13, Policy Analyst position at the Agency’s
National Office in March 2020. The DD stated that in February 2021, the Cleveland Office was
moving from the North Point Building to the Federal Building located across the street. The DD
thus notified, via email, all her employees of the move and asked them to clean out the office
accordingly. The DD indicated that she did not email Complainant, or any other non-Cleveland
employees, about the move. The DD noted that Complainant had not been employed at the
Cleveland office since March 2020, nearly a year. As supervisors were checking the offices,
Complainant’s former supervisor at the Cleveland office notified the DD that there were some
personal items left behind by Complainant. The DD stated that she thus advised S2 at the
National Office of the subject matter and asked him to have Complainant retrieve them.

Regarding claim 3, the DD denied allowing Complainant only a few days to pick up her items in
her old office or they would be discarded as junk. The record reveals that the DD sent a March
4, 2021, email to S2 asking S2 to ask Complainant about picking up her personal items left
behind in the Cleveland office a year ago. The DD indicated that if Complainant did not pick
them up, they would be discarded when Go Junk Company comes since everything must go. The
DD did not indicate that Complainant would have to pick them up within a few days. The DD
stated that Complainant asked the DD for her items to be shipped to her Florida home. The DD
sent Complainant two shipping boxes worth of her personal items accordingly.

Regarding claim 4, S3 denied making a statement to Complainant that her move to Florida would
result in her termination. S3 stated that he was informed by his budget office that Complainant,
a full-time teleworker, moved from her commuting area of the Cleveland, Ohio District Office to
Jacksonville, Florida, without any appropriate paperwork to management. Thus, S3 indicated
that he called Complainant to confirm and to gather information concerning a change of her
telework location to Florida.

The Agency found no discrimination or harassment as alleged. Complainant appealed the
Agency’s final decision and submits her brief contesting the Agency’s final decision. On appeal,
Complainant also raises matters not related to the instant complaint.

                                ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review "requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
                                                4                                     2022001750

determinations of the previous decision maker," and that EEOC "review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law").

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he or she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would
support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804 n. 14. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Department of Community Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509
U.S. 502 (1993).

This established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the personnel action
at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency's actions were motivated by discrimination. See U.S. Postal Service
Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v. Department of
Transportation, EEOC Request No. 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v. Department of Health
and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 8, 1990); Washington v. Department
of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31, 1990).

To establish a claim of harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) Complainant belongs to the
statutorily protected classes or engaged in prior EEO activity; (2) Complainant was subjected to
unwelcome conduct related to Complainant’s membership in those classes or Complainant’s
prior EEO activity; (3) the harassment complained of was based on those classes or that activity;
(4) the harassment had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with Complainant’s
work performance and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
(5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682
F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982). Further, the incidents must have been “sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the conditions of [complainant’s] employment and create an abusive working
environment.” Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993); see also Oncale v.
Sundowner Offshore Service, Inc., 23 U.S. 75 (1998). The harasser’s conduct should be
evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim’s circumstances.
Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 at 6 (Mar.
8, 1994).
                                               5                                    2022001750

Therefore, to prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was subjected to
conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in her position
would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the
conduct was taken because of a protected basis. Only if Complainant establishes both of those
elements, hostility and motive, will the question of Agency liability present itself.

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, we find
that the Agency proffered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Regarding claim
1, S1 stated that Complainant’s performance for FY 2020 was Fully Successful. Specifically, S1
indicated that Complainant’s performance for five results elements, including her co-lead
assignment in an accountability review team and her written products, did not warrant a higher
rating. S1 noted that she did explain to Complainant what documentation was used and the
sources for the rating.

Regarding claims 2 and 3, the DD indicated that she did not send a February 19, 2021, email to
any non-Cleveland office employees, including Complainant, concerning the Cleveland office
move. The DD stated that when she discovered that there were some personal items left behind
by Complainant in the Cleveland office since March 2020, she asked S2 to inquire about
Complainant picking them up. The DD stated that upon Complainant’s request, she shipped two
boxes of Complainant’s items to her home in Florida. Regarding claim 4, S3 denied making a
statement to Complainant that her move to Florida would result in her termination. S3 stated that
he called Complainant to confirm and to obtain information regarding her telework location
change.

After a review of the record, we find that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination. Further, we find that Complainant
failed to show that there were any similarly situated employees not in her protected groups who
were treated differently under similar circumstances. Regarding her claim of harassment,
considering all the events, we find that Complainant failed to show that it was related to any
protected basis of discrimination. Based on the foregoing, we find that Complainant failed to
show that the Agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination as she alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                                6                                     2022001750

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                7                                    2022001750

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 29, 2023
Date
