             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Birdie C., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                     Thomas J. Vilsack,
                                          Secretary,
                                  Department of Agriculture
                             (Food Safety and Inspection Service),
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2023001609

                                Agency No. FSIS-2022-00359

                                         DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s January 12, 2023 final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the
Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the complaint for a supplemental investigation.

                                    ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the Agency’s investigation was adequate for a factfinder to draw
conclusions as to whether a violation of the discrimination statutes has occurred.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Intermittent Food
Inspector (GS-7) at the Agency’s Smithfield Food facility in Red Springs, North Carolina.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2023001609

On or about March 25, 2022, Complainant reported an incident of alleged sexual harassment by
one of her coworkers (“Coworker”). Complainant complained when the Coworker stated that she
“could take two fingers and stick them up [Complainant’s] ass.” Complainant averred that she
could not report the incident to her first-line supervisor (“Supervisor 1”), who was related to the
Coworker, so Complainant reported the matter to another supervisor (“Supervisor 2”).
Complainant noted that the Coworker was moved to a different facility, and she had not seen her
since the incident. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 238, 61.

Complainant initiated the instant complaint on May 3, 2022, and on June 29, 2022, she filed an
EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her based on her age (60), and in
reprisal for her prior protected EEO activity of opposition to discrimination and harassment,
when:

       1.      on May 2, 2022, Complainant learned that she was not selected for a GS-1863-7,
               Food Inspector position, advertised under vacancy announcement number FSIS-
               22-MCE-11426010; and

       2.      on May 2, 2022, Complainant learned that she was not selected for a GS-1863-
               5/7, Food Inspector position, advertised under vacancy announcement number
               FSIS-22-MCE-11416244.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the ROI
and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge. When the
Agency did not receive notice of a request for a hearing or a final decision, 2 it issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), concluding that Complainant failed to prove that
she was subjected to discrimination as alleged.

Complainant filed the instant appeal and submitted a brief in support of her appeal. 3 The Agency
opposes Complainant’s appeal.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal


2
  On appeal, Complainant denies failing to respond and asserts that she contacted the Agency to
request a final decision.
3
  Complainant subsequently informed the Commission of her intent to file a civil action, but she
has not filed a civil action to date.
                                                3                                     2023001609

determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

EEO Investigation

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires, inter alia, that an agency develop an
impartial and appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised in the
complaint. One purpose of an investigation is to gather facts upon which a reasonable fact finder
may draw conclusions as to whether a violation of the discrimination statutes has occurred. Id.;
EEO MD-110, at Chap. 6, § IV.B. An investigation must include “a thorough review of the
circumstances under which the alleged discrimination occurred; the treatment of members of the
Complainant's group as compared with the treatment of similarly situated employees...and any
policies and/or practices that may constitute or appear to constitute discrimination, even though
they have not been expressly cited by the complainant.” Id. at § IV.C. In addition, an investigator
must identify and obtain “all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect
the outcome.” Id. at § VI.D.

Upon review, we find that the investigation was inadequate and that the record lacks the
thoroughness required for the fact finder to address the ultimate issue of whether discrimination
occurred. In this case, Complainant specifically alleged reprisal for filing the sexual harassment
complaint against the Coworker on March 24, 2022. ROI at 60. Complainant averred that the day
after she filed her report, she saw the Coworker and Supervisor 1 meet with a union
representative. Complainant stated that she was “pretty sure” that was how Supervisor 1 learned
of her sexual harassment complaint. Complainant alleged that Supervisor 1 soon began
retaliating against her. ROI at 61. However, the record does not contain any evidence
corroborating that the parties discussed Complainant’s allegation during this meeting. While it is
possible that Supervisor 1 learned of Complainant’s allegation of sexual harassment at this
meeting or soon after she reported it in March 2022, there is no supporting evidence in the
record.

Supervisor 1 did not reveal when she learned of Complainant’s report of sexual harassment, and
she only responded that she learned of Complainant’s prior EEO activity in “June of this year”
when she was involved in alternative dispute resolution for the instant complaint. 4 ROI at 114.
The EEO Investigator failed to follow-up to ask when Supervisor 1 learned of Complainant’s
March sexual harassment complaint.

For the non-selections at issue, a Resource Management Specialist was responsible for making
the recommendations. He explained that when he receives resumes, he will contact applicants’
supervisors if they are current Agency employees.


4
 The EEO Counselor’s Report noted that Supervisor 1 was contacted about Complainant’s EEO
complaint on May 16, 2022. ROI at 24.
                                                4                                    2023001609

If the supervisors do not recommend their employees, they will not be considered for an
interview. Here, the Resource Management Specialist testified that he spoke with Complainant’s
supervisors, including Supervisor 1, who did not provide a favorable recommendation, so
Complainant was not interviewed. He averred that he was not aware of Complainant’s prior EEO
activity. ROI at 139-43.

We find that these facts potentially raise a cat’s paw theory of discrimination. Under a cat’s paw
theory, animus and responsibility for adverse action can be attributed to a supervisor who was
not the ultimate decision maker, if that supervisor intended the adverse action to be a
consequence of her discriminatory conduct. See Feder v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No.
0720110014 (July 19, 2012) (appropriate under cat’s paw theory, to impute a manager’s
retaliatory animus to a deciding official where the manager wielded sufficient informal power to
influence a deciding official, who acted as a conduit for the manager’s retaliatory animus related
to the complainant’s reasonable accommodation). Since the Resource Management Specialist
relied upon the negative reference provided by Supervisor 1, 5 we find that it is necessary to
obtain the details surrounding her knowledge of Complainant’s March 24th report of sexual
harassment against the Coworker to address the ultimate issue of whether Supervisor 1 retaliated
against Complainant, through the Resource Management Specialist, for the non-selections.

Further, Supervisor 1 responded that she refrained from the selection process because she had “a
few ongoing issues” with Complainant, without specifying the issues. ROI at 119. Additional
information is needed to determine if one of the “ongoing issues” was Complainant’s allegation
of sexual harassment.

The Agency noted that Supervisor 2, and another supervisor (“Supervisor 3”) provided the
negative references that resulted in Complainant’s non-selection. Supervisor 2 testified that he
did not recommend Complainant because she did not take instructions well, and every time he
tried to give her instructions, she became argumentative and combative. ROI at 134. Supervisor
3 attested that Complainant can become “very aggressive” in response to a supervisory concern.
Supervisor 3 gave an example when she saw that Complainant had been gone for over twenty
minutes, but their breaks were only ten minutes. When Supervisor 3 asked Complainant where
she had been, she began yelling. ROI at 188. In support of their explanations, both provided
copies of emails they sent to the Resource Management Specialist to explain their non-
recommendations. However, the emails were sent to the Resource Management Specialist after
the May 2022 non-selections, on June 24, 2022, and July 7, 2022. ROI at 361, 401-2. We find
that it is not clear when these issues with Complainant arose, and clarification is needed as to
why these supervisors provided evidence that was generated after the non-selections at issue.




5
  Supervisor 1 repeatedly testified that she did not give input to the Resource Management
Specialist about Complainant, but he directly contradicted Supervisor 1’s assertions, and he
specified that he spoke with Supervisor 1 on March 31, 2022, when she stated that Complainant
was “combative,” and that Supervisor 1 “gave a negative review.” ROI at 147, 153-4, 366, 373.
                                              5                                    2023001609

While Complainant submitted a rebuttal in response to the testimony provided by Supervisor 1
and the Resource Management Specialist, she stated on appeal that she was not given the
opportunity to rebut the statements from Supervisor 2 and Supervisor 3. Further, there is no
indication that Complainant was provided an opportunity to name witnesses who could provide
evidence to support her claims of age discrimination and retaliation.

In sum, we conclude that the present record lacks the necessary information upon which to
adequately determine if Complainant was subjected to discrimination and/or retaliation when she
was not selected for the two Food Inspector positions.

                                       CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the
complaint back to the Agency to conduct a supplemental investigation, in accordance with the
Order below.

                       ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD (B0617)

The Agency is ordered to conduct a supplemental investigation to develop an adequate factual
record regarding Complainant’s claims within 90 days of receipt of this order. The Agency shall
obtain all pertinent evidence including, but not limited to, affidavits from responsible
management officials and other witnesses regarding:

       a)     Supervisor 1’s awareness of Complainant’s report that the Coworker sexually
              harassed her, made on March 4, 2022, including the date when she learned of
              Complainant’s report; who informed her; and other pertinent details related to her
              knowledge of Complainant’s complaint of sexual harassment. The Agency shall
              also obtain affidavits from other witnesses, including Supervisor 2, who could
              have knowledge of Supervisor 1’s awareness of Complainant’s report of sexual
              harassment.

       b)     Details of the “ongoing issues” that Supervisor 1 raised to rationalize her
              purported decision to refrain from participating in the selection process.
              Supervisor 1 will describe each issue and explain why these issues prevented her
              from providing a reference to the Resource Management Specialist.

       c)     Additional details regarding the information provided by Supervisor 2 and
              Supervisor 3 of Complainant’s conduct supporting their decisions to not
              recommend Complainant for the positions at issue. They will provide the
              approximate dates of the incidents and explain why they submitted emails sent to
              the Resource Management Specialist after the May non-selections as evidence for
              the instant complaint.
                                                6                                     2023001609

       d)      Complainant’s witnesses to her claims of age discrimination and retaliation. The
               Agency shall request the names of any potential witnesses from Complainant, and
               if any, the Agency shall obtain affidavits from witnesses that possess relevant
               testimony for the claims at issue.

       e)      Complainant’s rebuttal to the statements provided by Supervisor 2 and Supervisor
               3. The Agency shall also give Complainant an opportunity to rebut the evidence
               obtained in the ordered supplemental investigation.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide Complainant with a copy of the
supplemental record and shall notify Complainant of the appropriate rights. If Complainant
requests a final decision without a hearing, the Agency shall issue a final decision within 30 days
of receipt of her request, including appeal rights.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The Agency must send
to the Compliance Officer: 1) a copy of the Agency’s letter of acknowledgement to Complainant;
2) a copy of the Agency’s notice that transmits the supplemental investigative file and notice of
rights; 3) either a copy of Complainant’s request for a hearing, a copy of her request for a final
decision, or a statement from the Agency that it did not receive a response from Complainant by
the end of the election period. The report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and their representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
                                                  7                                   2023001609

The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the
Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29
C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has
the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph
below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil
action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline
stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil
action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                 8                                     2023001609

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  9                                     2023001609

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 12, 2024
Date
