             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Maxie S., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Christine Wormuth,
                                          Secretary,
                                   Department of the Army,
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2023002288

                           Agency No. ARCEHECSA23OCT00531


                                          DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission) from the Agency's decision dated January 13, 2023, dismissing her complaint
alleging unlawful employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was the owner and employee of
The Mind Group, Inc., a Virginia-based company that provides cyber risk management and
information technology governance services. The Mind Group was a subcontractor to several
prime contractors who had contracts directly with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
Complainant’s primary duty location was USACE’s headquarters in Washington, D.C.

On December 29, 2022, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination on the bases of sex (female/pregnancy) and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2023002288

    a. Within 30-days following Complainant’s pregnancy disclosure, the EDMS Data
       Governance, Cyber Security Yello, and UEITS contracts were canceled, or funding was
       cut for contracts The Mind Group, Inc. was designated as a Sub-Contractor on.

    b. Following Complainant’s EEO complaint filing on 14 October 2022, the EDW contract
       was canceled, the PROMIS contract was not renewed, and the REMIS RFP bid was
       canceled.

The Agency dismissed the formal complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) for failure to
state a claim, finding that Complainant did not have standing to file an EEO complaint with the
Agency because she was a contingent worker/contractor and not an employee of the Agency.
The decision states: “Your contractual agreements for services rendered are with the Prime
Contractors, not USACE. Contract service providers are accountable solely to the Contractor,
who, in turn is responsible to USACE. The working relationship information describing the
relationship between The Mind Group, Inc. and USACE which is captured in the EEO
Counselor’s report shows that you are not considered a joint employee of USACE.”

Complainant filed the instant appeal. On appeal, Complainant contends the Agency erred in
finding that she was not a joint employee of the Agency because the record demonstrates that
Complainant satisfies at the least nine of the Ma factors, 2 including that the Agency controlled
nearly every aspect of Complainant’s work. In support of this, Complainant states that the
Agency’s Chief Information Officer would instruct her on which district to prioritize on any
given contract, would instruct Complainant to pull records of previous contracts to use as
precedent for her work, Complainant would have to obtain Chief Information Officer’s sign-off
on how to proceed with any disagreements on contract processes or provisions, Chief
Information Officer directed Complainant to perform research he deemed necessary, Chief
Information Officer assigned and directed the work Complainant was to perform and supervised
Complainant in the performance of those duties. Complainant further stated that she reported
directly to USACE employees, including Chief Information Officer and others. Complainant
stated USACE issued payments to The Mind Group, which then issued payments to her.
Complainant states the work she performed was integral to the Agency’s business. She also
stated USACE provided her with the necessary equipment to perform her role and any equipment
she needed, she requested from USACE. Complainant asserts she satisfies nine of the Ma
factors: (1) USACE controlled the means and manner of her work; (2) her work was integral to
the Agency; (3) her work was done under the direction of USACE supervisors; (4) her work
required significant skill; (5) USACE provided Complainant with the equipment and the means
to perform her work for the Agency; (6) she worked for USACE for a lengthy period of time
(i.e., five years); (7) USACE compensated her based on the time she worked; (8) USACE
abruptly and unilaterally terminated her work with the Agency; and (9) the intention of the
parties was that Complainant would essentially be a full-time cybersecurity employee of
USACE.


2
 See Ma v. Dep’t of Health and Human Services, EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 & 01962390
(May 29, 1998).
                                                3                                     2023002288

Therefore, Complainant asks that we reverse the Agency’s final decision and remand this matter
for further investigation. Complainant submitted a sworn declaration with her appeal brief as
Exhibit 1.

The Agency filed a Motion to Strike Complainant’s declaration on the grounds that new
evidence is generally not considered unless the party makes an affirmative showing that the
evidence was not reasonably available prior to or during the investigation. The Agency argues
Complainant has not provided any sort of explanation or justification as to why it was not
possible to introduce the evidence earlier and notes that this information would have been
previously available to Complainant.

The Agency further argues on appeal that it has correctly identified that Complainant was not an
employee because: 1) her work was conducted as a subcontractor through the prime contractors
working with the Agency, and 2) Complainant failed to present evidence sufficiently
demonstrating an employer/employee relationship. The Agency points to information in the EEO
Counselor’s Report to state there is sufficient information to support the determination that
Complainant was not an employee.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The issue here is whether the Agency properly dismissed Complainant's complaint for failure to
state a claim on the basis that Complainant was not its employee. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §
1614.103(a) provides that complaints of discrimination shall be processed in accordance with
Part 1614 of the EEOC Regulations. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(c) provides that
within covered departments, agencies, units, Part 1614 applies to all employees and applicants
for employment.

In Serita B. v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150846 (Nov. 10, 2016), the
Commission reaffirmed its longstanding position on “joint employers” and noted that it is found
in numerous sources. See, e.g., EEOC Compliance Manual Section 2, “Threshold Issues,”
Section 2-III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) (May 1, 2000) (Compliance Manual); EEOC Enforcement
Guidance: Application of EEO Laws to Contingent Workers Placed by Temporary Employment
Agencies and Other Staffing Firms (Dec. 3, 1997) (Enforcement Guidance), “Coverage Issues,”
Question 2; Ma v. Dep’t of Health and Human Services, EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 &
01962390 (May 29, 1998). We reiterate the analysis set forth in those decisions and guidance
documents in this decision.

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each exercise sufficient control
of an individual to qualify as the worker's employer. Compliance Manual, Section 2-
III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). To determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise sufficient control,
EEOC considers factors derived from common law principles of agency. See Enforcement
Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2. EEOC considers, inter alia, the Agency's right to
control when, where, and how the worker performs the job; the right to assign additional projects
to the worker; whether the work is performed on Agency premises; whether the Agency provides
                                                  4                                     2023002288

the tools, material, and equipment to perform the job; the duration of the relationship between
the Agency and the worker; whether the Agency controls the worker's schedule; and whether the
Agency can discharge the worker. Compliance Manual, Section 2 - III(A)(1) (citing Nationwide
Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318, 323-24 (1992)); EEOC v. Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550
F. App'x 253, 256 (6th Cir. 2013) (“Entities are joint employers if they ‘share or codetermine
those matters governing essential terms and conditions of employment”’) (quoting Carrier Corp.
v. NLRB, 768 F.2d 778, 781 (6th Cir. 1985); see also Ma, EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 &
01962390.

The language of the contract between the Agency and the staffing firm is not dispositive as to
whether a joint employment situation exists. In determining a worker's status, EEOC looks to
what actually occurs in the workplace, even if it contradicts the language in the contract between
the staffing firm and the agency. Baker v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 01A45313
(Mar. 16, 2006) (while contract between staffing firm and agency provided that contract
personnel were employees of staffing firm under its administrative supervision and control,
agency actually retained supervisory authority over the contract workers).

On the factor of the right to control when, where, and how the worker performs the job and to
assign additional projects, complete agency control is not required. Rather, the control may be
partial or joint and still point to joint employment. Shorter v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120131148 (June 11, 2013) (where both staffing firm and agency made
assignments, this pointed to joint employment); Complainant v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120143162 (May 20, 2015), request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No.
0520150430 (Mar. 11, 2016) (where staffing firm wrote and issued complainant's appraisal with
input from agency, this pointed toward joint employment). Likewise, where both the agency and
staffing firm provided tools, material, and equipment to perform the job, this pointed to joint
employment. Elkin v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120122211, 2012 WL 5818075
(Nov. 8, 2012). Similarly, where a staffing firm terminates a worker after an agency
communicates it no longer wants the worker's services, this supports a finding that the agency
has joint or de facto power to discharge the worker. See, e.g., Complainants v. Dep't of Justice,
EEOC Appeal Nos. 0120141963 & 0120141762 (Jan. 28, 2015); see also Skanska USA Bldg.,
Inc., 550 Fed. App'x at 254, 256 (where defendant removed staffing firm's workers from job site
without challenge from staffing firm, and after such removals staffing firm generally fired
worker, this pointed to joint employment); Butler v. Drive Auto. Indus. of America, Inc., 793
F.3d 404, 414-15 (4th Cir. 2015). The EEOC considers an entity's right to control the terms and
conditions of employment, whether or not it exercises that right, as relevant to joint employer
status. Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2, Example 5 (where an entity
reserves the right to direct the means and manner of an individual's work, but does not generally
exercise that right, the entity may still be found to be a joint employer).

In assessing the right to control, EEOC does not consider any one factor to be decisive and
emphasizes that it is not necessary to satisfy a majority of the factors. In particular, the fact that
an individual performs work pursuant to a contract between the federal government and an
outside organization and is paid and provided with benefits by that organization, on its own, is
                                                 5                                     2023002288

not enough to show that joint employment does not exist. Rather, the analysis is holistic. All the
circumstances in the individual's relationship with the agency should be considered to determine
if the agency should be deemed the worker's joint employer. Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage
Issues,” at Qs. 1 and 2. In sum, a federal agency will qualify as a joint employer of an individual
if it has the requisite right to control the means and manner of the individual's work, regardless
of whether the individual is paid by an outside organization or is on the federal payroll. See id.,
at Q. 2.

In finding that Complainant was not an Agency employee, the Agency’s decision fell well short
of the required holistic analysis. The Agency limited its analysis to the fact that Complainant is a
subcontractor who contracted with prime contractors, not the Agency, with no discussion of the
actual day-to-day control of Complainant’s work in the workplace. Additionally, the Agency
relied on information provided in the EEO Counselor’s Report, but the report does not identify
who specifically provided this information, nor is there any sworn testimony to support the
information contained in the report. While Complainant ultimately bears the burden to prove
discrimination, it is the burden of the Agency to have evidence or proof in support of its final
decision. See Marshall v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05910685 (Sept. 6, 1991). The
Agency has not met its burden here.

Based on the foregoing, we find that the record is not sufficiently developed to make a reasoned
determination as to whether the Agency is a joint employer for the purpose of using the 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 complaint process.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency's final decision dismissing Complainant's complaint, and
we REMAND this matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation in accordance with the
Order below.

                                             ORDER

Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency is ORDERED
to take the following actions:

   1. Conduct a supplemental investigation to obtain evidence consistent with this decision and
      relevant in assessing whether the Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes. The
      evidentiary record shall include, but is not limited to, affidavits from Agency
      management officials, and to the extent possible, the prime contractors with whom
      Complainant and/or The Mind Group contracted, detailing who had actual “real life”
      control of Complainant's position and day-to-day work. Among other things, these
      affidavits should include information detailing the role of the Agency's Chief Information
      Officer as it interfaced with Complainant's position. The Agency shall then provide
      Complainant with an opportunity to provide a response to the new evidence.
                                                6                                     2023002288

   2. Once the supplemental investigation is completed, the Agency shall either issue a new
      final decision dismissing the formal complaint, with an appropriate analysis of relevant
      facts with appeal rights to the Commission, or a letter accepting Complainant's complaint
      for investigation.

   3. A copy of the supplemental investigation and new dismissal letter or letter of acceptance
      shall be provided as set forth below in the section entitled “Implementation of the
      Commission's Decision.”

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               7                                    2023002288

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).
                                                 8                                      2023002288

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 29, 2023
Date
