             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Fidel S., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Carlos Del Toro,
                                          Secretary,
                                    Department of the Navy,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2023002334

                                 Hearing No. 551-2022-00052X

                                 Agency No. 21-4523A-00245


                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s February 10, 2023, final
order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Helper Trainee,
Marine Machinery Mechanic at the Agency’s Puget Sound Naval Shipyard and Intermediate
Maintenance Facility in Bremerton, Washington. Complainant began his career conditional
appointment on January 7, 2019, and he was subject to a two-year probationary period. Report of
Investigation (ROI) at 113.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2023002334

On or about June 1, 2019, Complainant suffered a workplace injury that caused a right shoulder
slap tear/adhesive capsulitis. Complainant testified that he needed accommodations due to his
inability to reach above his head and carry heavy objects, and accommodations were provided.
ROI at 402, 405, 606.

On March 17, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him based on disability (physical) when on December 22, 2020, he was notified of his
termination from federal service, effective December 31, 2020. At the conclusion of the
investigations, 2 the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the ROI and notice of his right
to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested
a hearing.

On November 21, 2022, the AJ issued a Notice of Intent to Issue Summary Judgment (“Notice of
Intent”). The AJ noted that there did not appear to be any issues of material fact or credibility to
be determined at a hearing. The AJ found that there was no evidence to show that Complainant’s
termination was motivated by disability. For example, the record lacked evidence that a non-
disabled employee was treated more favorably under similar circumstances. The Agency
removed Complainant during his probationary period due to his repeated failures to obtain the
necessary “non-nuclear quality control” (NNQC) qualification required to effectively perform his
duties. The record also showed that the Agency terminated other employees for failing to obtain
qualifications during their probationary periods. In addition, Complainant’s current first-line
supervisor (“Supervisor”) reported that Complainant’s workplace attitude was often
uncooperative and combative.

To the extent that Complainant believed that his medical limitations were the cause of his failure
to obtain his qualifications and that the Agency failed to accommodate his limitations, the AJ
found that Complainant did not raise a failure to accommodate claim. The AJ stated that
Complainant’s allegations of discriminatory treatment appear to rely upon subjective opinion,
which was insufficient to defeat summary judgment, but if Complainant possessed evidence to
corroborate his claims, he should submit it. The AJ ordered the parties to respond to the Notice
of Intent. Both parties filed timely responses.

On January 11, 2023, the AJ issued a decision without a hearing. Upon review of the parties’
responses, the AJ found that Complainant did not provide a reason to disturb the findings in the
prior Notice of Intent. The AJ concluded that the evidentiary record was sufficiently developed
and granted summary judgment in the Agency’s favor.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. Complainant filed the
instant appeal but did not submit any arguments in support of his appeal. The Agency opposes
his appeal.


2
  The Agency conducted a supplemental investigation to obtain additional evidence, including
information about the specific conduct that was considered for Complainant’s termination.
                                                3                                     2023002334

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Standard of Review

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that
a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other
words, we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and the Agency’s,
factual conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment
discrimination statute was violated. See id. at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo
standard of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions
of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

Decision without a Hearing

We determine whether the AJ appropriately issued the decision without a hearing. The
Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision without a
hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P.
56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge determines no
genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards. Anderson v.
Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment motion, the
judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to weighing the
evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the non-moving
party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255.
A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving
party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d
103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
We carefully reviewed the record and find that it is adequately developed. To successfully
oppose a decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of record that are
in dispute or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute. Here, Complainant
offers no arguments on appeal to show a genuine dispute of material fact, and we find that a
decision without a hearing was appropriate.
                                               4                                    2023002334

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). He must generally establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he was
subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an inference
of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). The prima facie
inquiry may be dispensed with in this case, however, since the Agency has articulated legitimate
and nondiscriminatory reasons for its conduct. See U.S. Postal Serv. Bd. of Governors v. Aikens,
460 U.S. 711, 713-17 (1983); Holley v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 05950842
(Nov. 13, 1997). To ultimately prevail, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson
Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502,
519 (1993); Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981); Holley, supra;
Pavelka v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05950351 (Dec. 14, 1995).

Assuming, arguendo, that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on
disability, we find that the Agency proffered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for his
removal. The Superintendent of Shop 38 testified that he considered Complainant’s performance
and conduct deficiencies in his decision to terminate his employment during his probationary
period. Specifically, Complainant could not obtain a foundational qualification that all Shop 38
employees were expected to obtain because he twice failed the NNQC and was not proactive in
taking the necessary steps to take the course for the third time. 3 ROI at 422-5, 428-30.

The Superintendent also considered the Supervisor’s feedback, which noted that Complainant
could not follow basic instructions and he constantly argued with the mechanics on best
practices. The Supervisor provided an example when he did not follow her instructions, which
led to their inability to accomplish their job the next day. When she spoke to him about the
situation, he either did not understand or care about her concerns. The Supervisor also noted a
time when she assigned Complainant to work “topside,” and when she asked why he was not on
the boat, he replied that there were enough people and that he would help someone else. The
Supervisor instructed Complainant to work on the boat, as previously assigned. ROI at 443.

The Supervisor further elaborated that Complainant demonstrated a “horrible attitude,” such as
when he was rude to attendants who were unable to check a tool right away, and he was
unwilling to learn when mechanics tried to teach/mentor him on the work.



3
  The Superintendent stated that he was not aware at the time he made the decision to remove
Complainant that a Training Instructor was trying to coordinate a third attempt at the NNQC test.
The Training Instructor explained that after Complainant failed the exam the second time, he
sent a notice to the shop to request that Complainant review the NNQC material before enrolling
in another class or to see him for a one-on-one session, and he spoke to the General Foreman
about Complainant. Supplemental ROI at 27, 45.
                                               5                                    2023002334

The Supervisor added that she had multiple one-on-one conversations with Complainant about
her expectations from him. Supplemental ROI at 33.

We find that Complainant has not shown that the proffered reasons were pretexts for
discrimination. Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such weaknesses, inconsistencies, or
contradictions in the Agency’s proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. See Opare-Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20, 2007) (finding that the agency’s explanations were
confusing, contradictory, and lacking credibility, which were then successfully rebutted by the
complainant), request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520080211 (May 30, 2008). While
other employees averred that they did not witness Complainant being uncooperative or
combative, no witness provided testimony to dispute the Supervisor’s specific examples. ROI at
447, 461, 470, 511. The record also shows that the Agency previously terminated two other Shop
38 employees for repeatedly failing exams, including the NNQC. ROI at 115.

Complainant did not show that the proffered reasons are not worthy of belief and his bare
assertions that management officials discriminated against him are insufficient to prove pretext
or that their actions were discriminatory. As such, we find that Complainant did not establish
disability discrimination when the Agency terminated his employment during his probationary
period.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final order adopting the AJ’s decision.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                  6                                   2023002334

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  7                                     2023002334

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 3, 2024
Date
