           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                Herschel T., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                             Xavier Becerra,
                                Secretary,
                 Department of Health and Human Services
                      (National Institutes of Health),
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2022002961

                       Hearing No. 531-2019-00583X

                     Agency No. HHS-NIH-NINR-146-18

                                  DECISION

On April 13, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a), from the Agency’s April 25, 2022, final decision concerning his
equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

                             ISSUES PRESENTED

    1. Whether the Agency should be subjected to sanctions for late issuance
       of the Final Agency Decision (FAD)

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                          2022002961

  2. Whether the Agency properly determined that Complainant was not
     subjected to discrimination as alleged

                               BACKGROUND

Procedural Background

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as
an Information Technology Specialist, GS-2210-12, at the Agency’s Division
of Management Services (DMS), Office of Information Technology (OIT),
National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), National Institutes of Health
(NIH) facility in Bethesda, Maryland.

On December 27, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that
the Agency discriminated against Complainant on the bases of race (White),
national origin (Hispanic), sex (male), disability (physical), and retaliation
(unspecified) when:

  1. On August 1, 2018, Complainant received an email stating that he
     would not receive a midyear performance review due to his ongoing
     medical condition.

  2. On August 9, 2018, management denied Complainant’s request to
     telework as a reasonable accommodation (RA).

Although Complainant clearly alleged retaliation in EEO counseling and his
formal complaint, the Agency did not mention reprisal or retaliation as a
basis for discrimination in its acceptance letter. The Agency otherwise
accepted the foregoing claims as framed and conducted an investigation into
the matter. Complainant did not challenge the framing of the complaint prior
to or during the investigation. At the conclusion of the investigation, the
Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and
notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely
requested a hearing on May 16, 2019.

During the initial status conference in October 2019, Complainant
(proceeding pro se) informed the AJ he wished to amend his complaint.
However, Complainant did not timely amend his complaint or initiate
discovery. In December 2019, Complainant obtained counsel. On December
20, 2019, Complainant, through his counsel, filed a Motion for Leave to
Amend, Leave to Conduct Discovery, and to Extend Discovery Deadlines.
                                     3                          2022002961

The Motion sought to add another disability and retaliation as bases for
discrimination, as well as to add additional claims. The AJ denied
Complainant’s motion except to allow him to add an additional disability to
his complaint. On March 27, 2020, Complainant, through his counsel,
withdrew his hearing request and requested a Final Agency Decision from
the Agency. The AJ acknowledged receipt of the withdrawal and closed the
case in FedSep but did not issue a formal dismissal Order.

On April 13, 2022, Complainant, through counsel, filed a Motion for
Sanctions and Default Judgment with the Commission for the Agency’s
failure to issue a Final Agency Decision as of that date.

On April 25, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that
the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The Agency
dismissed Claim 1 regarding Complainant’s midyear pursuant to 20 C.F.R. §
1614.107(a)(1) for failure to state a claim, finding that claims involving
midyear performance appraisals do not constitute discrete acts of
discrimination because they do not have a permanent effect. Regarding
Claim 2, the Agency found that Complainant was not denied his request for
reasonable accommodation and therefore he failed to establish a prima facie
case for denial of reasonable accommodation. The Agency found that even if
Complainant had established his prima facie case, he failed to show the
Agency acted unreasonably or unreasonably delayed the process. Therefore,
even in the light most favorable to Complainant, he had not met his burden
of persuasion to show by a preponderance of the evidence that he was
subjected to disability discrimination.

Factual Background

During the investigation, Complainant testified that his race was White, his
sex was male, his national origin was Hispanic/Latino, and he had a physical
disability involving treatment for cancer. He was not asked about the basis
of his reprisal claim during the investigation. Complainant testified that he
was discriminated against by his first line supervisor, Chief Information
Officer (Caucasian, female, German, no disability), and his second line
supervisor, Executive Officer (Mixed race, female, Cape Verdean/American,
no disability). Complainant testified that Chief Information Officer and
Executive Officer were aware of his race, sex, and national origin. He also
testified that they were aware of his disability since approximately November
2017 when he verbally told them about his ongoing medical appointments
and provided Chief Information Officer a copy of his surgery schedule.
                                       4                          2022002961

      Claim 2 – Reasonable Accommodation

Complainant testified that his job duties include installing, configuring,
troubleshooting, and maintaining customer hardware and software;
resolving difficult customer support requests involving integration or
configuration related issues and supports systems involving a wide variety of
different platforms, operating systems, applications, and desktop
configurations; working with network specialists, applications developers,
and security specialists to prevent recurring problems; performing work
pertaining primarily to the coordination, tasking, and the successful
operation of the following areas: desktop support, network, and
telecommunication; and performing other duties as assigned.

Complainant testified that he underwent surgery in August 2018 that
incapacitated him from driving to and from work, affected his ability to bend,
sit, or walk for extended periods, and precluded him from lifting object over
10 pounds. He stated that this left him unable to physically install, configure,
troubleshoot, and maintain customer hardware and software, and prevented
him from performing physical work pertaining primarily to the coordination,
tasking, and the successful operation of the following areas: desktop
support, network, and telecommunication.

As these responsibilities were essential to his job, Complainant sent an email
to Chief Information Officer on August 6, 2018, requesting a reasonable
accommodation. Complainant testified he provided a letter from his
physician which stated that Complainant could resume telework starting
August 9, 2018, and needed to telework through August 20, 2018.

Complainant indicated that Chief Information Officer denied his request and
requested additional information. He stated that the Agency later approved
his request. He admitted the Agency did not deny his reasonable
accommodation request and that the Agency approved his telework request
for September 10, 2018 through September 20, 2018.

Chief Information Officer testified that Complainant’s request for reasonable
accommodation was not denied. She testified Complainant was informed by
both Human Resources and the reasonable accommodation group at the
Agency that in order to be granted a reasonable accommodation, he needed
to provide sufficient medical documentation to process his request. She
stated that prior to Complainant’s surgery, they had discussed his telework
options. He had asked if she would be open to telework and she said yes.
                                      5                           2022002961

She stated that once all required documentation was submitted,
Complainant’s accommodation request was processed and approved within
three days. She stated that Complainant appeared in the office on
September 4, 2018 to return to work without any notice to her. She asked
again for a doctor’s note and he emailed it to her. Chief Information Officer
testified that she was out on leave for two weeks and although
Complainant’s request for telework was granted for September 7, 2018 to
September 20, 2018, he reported to the office in visible pain.

The record reflects that on August 1, 2018, Chief Information Officer emailed
Complainant noting that official time was due the following day and that
Complainant should enter leave for the surgery that Complainant had
indicated was the next week. She reminded Complainant that prior to his
leave, she would need a note from his doctor stating that Complainant would
be on medical leave for surgery and the estimated time that Complainant
would be out of work post-surgery. She noted that no medical details were
needed in that note. Chief Information Officer also stated that when
Complainant returned to work, she would need a note from his doctor
clearing Complainant to return to work and suggesting any accommodations
Complainant would need. (Report of Investigation (ROI), p. 179).

Complainant responded after the close of business on August 6, 2018, and
attached an unsigned note from his physician stating that Complainant
would be undergoing surgery on August 7, 2018, and he would not be able
to lift anything greater than 10-15 pounds for six weeks. However,
Complainant could resume teleworking on August 9, 2018, and would be
restricted to this through September 20, 2018. However, after six weeks,
Complainant would have no activity restrictions. (ROI, pp. 180-181).

Chief Information Officer responded on August 9, 2018, stating that the
letter provided by Complainant’s physician was not acceptable because it
was not signed and the medical documentation did not “[s]pecify the
existence of a disability and explain the need for you to telework for a period
of six (6) weeks as a reasonable accommodation. Further, it did not explain
why working in the office was medically not acceptable.” Additionally,
“[e]xcept for lifting more than 10-15 pounds, it did not specify any other
functional limitations due to your disability. Besides carrying your work lap
top (3-4 pounds), I do not require you lift anything heavier than 10-15
pounds.”
                                      6                          2022002961

She asked Complainant to provide medical document with additional
specifics and indicated that Complainant could provide his physician this
letter and a copy of the attached position description to aid his physician in
providing documentation. Complainant was advised to provide this
information no later than August 14, 2018. (ROI, p. 183-185).

On August 14, 2018, Human Resources informed Chief Information Officer
and Accessibility Consultant that the medical documentation had been
reviewed and it was not signed, and it did not state why the employee
needed telework. It stated that once a proper medical document was
received by the Occupational Medical Services and a report given to
Complainant’s supervisor, the supervisor could then make a decision about
the reasonable accommodation request. (ROI, pp. 189-190).

On August 20, 2018, Chief Information Officer emailed that she had received
a sick leave request that morning for Complainant for August 20 through
August 23. She stated that she believed that since Complainant’s regular
telework day was Friday, Complainant did not believe that he needed to
provide medical documentation for any accommodation and/or to clear him
to return to work. She stated she had not yet received any documentation
from Complainant, and she believed Complainant thought that the request
for documentation was her personal requirement and not the Agency’s.
(ROI, p. 189).

On August 21, 2018, Accessibility Consultant stated that she had contacted
Complainant through his work email and telephone, as well as his personal
cell phone, but she had been unable to reach him. (ROI, p. 188). However,
later that day, Accessibility Consultant stated she had met with Complainant
and explained the Agency’s Reasonable Accommodation program.
Complainant understood his request would be processed anew and he had
requested to telework fulltime until September 20, 2018. She had requested
that Complainant submit sufficient supporting medical documentation to the
office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion to process his request. (ROI, pp.
187-188). Accessibility Consultant clarified on August 22, 2018 that
Complainant had not yet submitted medical documentation to continue
processing his reasonable accommodation request and therefore his request
was not ripe for decision. (ROI, p. 186).

Chief Information Officer emailed Complainant on August 22, 2018
reminding him that he still needed to provide medical documentation
clearing him to work and to let her know what type of leave he planned to
use in the meantime.
                                       7                          2022002961

She also stated that once he was cleared to work, Complainant would need
to submit medical documentation stating why he needed a reasonable
accommodation and the medical release form to Occupational Medical
Services so she could work with the Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion Office to
provide his accommodation. (ROI, p. 191).

On August 30, 2018, Complainant provided a signed work release from his
physician dated August 29, 2018. The release stated that Complainant could
resume work at that time, but he could not lift anything greater than 10-15
pounds for six weeks. The release stated that Complainant could “resume
work in any setting (home, office, etc) as long as his activity restrictions are
followed.” The release stated that Complainant would have no restrictions
after 6 weeks. (ROI, p. 192).

Complainant testified that on September 4, 2018, he provided Chief
Information Officer and Accessibility Consultant a Medical Evaluation of
Functional Activities Form from Occupational Medical Services. Complainant
stated he met with the Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion and
employee relations on September 6, 2018, to review his accommodation
request. On September 7, 2018, Chief Information Officer granted
Complainant’s request for ad hoc telework until September 20, 2018. (ROI,
p. 199).

Complainant testified he believed his race, national origin, and sex were
factors in his request for telework as a reasonable accommodation being
denied because he understood four other employees were all granted
leniency to telework and did not have to go to Occupational Medical Services
to request telework for personal matters. Complainant testified that he
disability was a factor and he was discriminated against due to his medical
condition because he had informed Chief Information Officer that he would
be receiving treatment at the National Cancer Institute and there was no
reason that he would fabricate a false letter. He also noted that they had
discussed the opportunity for telework through Complainant’s treatment and
recovery.

Chief Information Officer denied that Complainant’s sex, race, national
origin, or disability were factors in the Agency’s actions. Of the four
employees identified by Complainant, Chief Information Officer stated that
she did not supervise two of them. Chief Information Officer testified that
Comparator 1 (African-American, male, African-American, unknown
disability) had never requested a reasonable accommodation.
                                      8                          2022002961

She testified that Comparator 2 (White, female, American, unknown
disability) did request a telework accommodation and she was allowed to
telework no more than 10 hours per week and she was required to take
leave for the remainder of the pay period. In addition, Comparator 2 was
required to provide all therapy and doctor appointment schedules in writing
by noon of the week prior to the appointments. She was also required to
submit regular updates from her family member’s medical team. She
returned to work full-time on April 2, 2018, with no additional telework
accommodations. (The record reflects that Comparator 2 requested telework
as a reasonable accommodation for a family member and she was informed
she could not receive a reasonable accommodation for the needs of a family
member, but she could use leave under the Family Medical Leave Act).

                         CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant initially filed a Motion for Sanctions and Default Judgment for
the Agency’s failure to issue a FAD for nearly two years. Complainant
asserted that default judgment in his favor was warranted because the
Agency had provided no explanation for the delay, the delay had prejudiced
his case in that so much time had passed that witnesses would not be able
to recall events as clearly and documentary evidence may have been lost or
destroyed, the delay had caused Complainant substantial hardship because
he had to wait an additional two years for resolution and incur additional
attorney’s fees, and the integrity of the EEO process had been undermined.
In the alternative, Complainant requested the Commission consider other
sanctions, including but not limited to, attorney’s fees and costs incurred in
filing the Motion for Sanctions and Default Judgment.

After the Agency issued the FAD, Complainant also timely filed a brief in
support of his appeal. 2 On appeal, Complainant first asserts that the FAD
must be reversed because the Agency denied Complainant a reasonable
accommodation. In support of this, the Agency states that Complainant
established a prima facie case of denial of a reasonable accommodation and
the Agency unnecessarily delayed its approval of Complainant’s
accommodation.




2
  On July 17, 2022, counsel for Complainant sought an extension of time in
which to file Complainant’s Brief in Support of his appeal. Complainant was
granted an extension until July 1, 2022, making his brief filed on June 20,
2022 timely.
                                      9                           2022002961

Second, the Agency asserts that the FAD must be reversed because the
Agency discriminated against Complainant based on race, sex, national
origin, and disability by denying him telework and that the Agency erred in
not analyzing this claim under a disparate treatment framework.
Complainant states that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the
Agency and Complainant shows the Agency’s proffered reason was unworthy
of credence. Third, Complainant argues the FAD must be reversed because
the Agency discriminated against Complainant by delaying his midyear
performance review because the postponement prevented him from having
a fair opportunity for promotion and negatively impacted his performance
record. Complainant asserts that the investigator did not collect sufficient
evidence to determine that Complainant was not discriminated against in
having his midyear review postponed. Fourth, Complainant argues that in
the alternative, the Commission should remand this matter for supplemental
investigation or additional discovery. Complainant asserts the investigator
failed to follow up on several sources that Complainant suggested could
provide information to support his case, and the EEOC AJ denied
Complainant adequate discovery. Last, Complainant contends the Agency
should be sanctioned for its excessive delay in issuing the FAD.

The Agency contends on appeal that the FAD correctly found that the Agency
did not deny Complainant’s request for a reasonable accommodation. The
Agency further contends that Complainant cannot establish a prima facie
case of discrimination based on race, national origin, or disability because he
failed to identify similarly situated employees. The Agency asserts that
Complainant failed to state a claim with regard to his midyear review and he
failed to put forward any cognizable claim that he was harmed as a result of
the delayed midyear evaluation. The Agency also contends that a
supplemental investigation is not warranted because the Agency met its
burden to develop an impartial and appropriate factual record and
Complainant had a full opportunity to conduct discovery and obtain
supplemental information during the hearing process. Lastly, the Agency
asserts that a sanction of default judgment is not warranted because
Complainant has failed to demonstrate prejudice. The Agency states that the
hearing case was closed in FedSep, but no order was issued ordering the
Agency to produce a FAD in a specific time frame. According to the Agency,
they had a significant backlog of cases awaiting a FAD and as of August
2020, only two FAD writers and one team lead available to complete the
FADs. The Agency hired a new Director in August 2020 who took concrete
action to resolve the backlog by increasing internal staff and in May 2022,
she reestablished a vendor to assist the Agency with writing FADs.
                                     10                         2022002961

Thus, the delay in issuing the FAD was an unfortunate result of staffing
shortages which the Agency has taken steps to improve.

                          STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS

Complainant's Request for Default Judgment as a Sanction for Untimely
Issuance of FAD

We note that our regulations require agency action in a timely manner at
many points in the EEO process. Tammy S. v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120084008 (June 6, 2014). Compliance with these timeframes is not
optional; as the Commission stated in Royal v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs,
EEOC Request No. 0520080052 (Sept. 25, 2009), “the Commission has the
inherent power to protect its administrative process from abuse by either
party and must insure that agencies, as well as complainants, abide by its
regulations.” Because of the length of time it can take to process a federal
sector EEO complaint, any delays in complying with the time frames in the
regulations can impact the outcome of the complainant's claims. Id.

Here, we find that the Agency failed to comply with the Commission's
regulations. The record reveals that the AJ acknowledged Complainant’s
withdrawal of his hearing request on March 27, 2020 and the Agency
concedes it has taken more than a year to issue its final decision on the
complaint, but attributed the delay to a significant case backlog and a
shortage of staff needed to process those cases.
                                      11                          2022002961

Although the Agency failed to timely issue a final decision as required by our
regulations, it did not act in in a manner to warrant the sanction of a default
judgment against it. See, e.g. Josefina L. v. Soc. Sec. Admin., 0120142023
(July 19, 2016), req. for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520170108
(Feb. 9, 2017) (finding that the Agency's 571-day delay in issuing the
decision did not warrant sanctions, as complainant did not show she was
prejudiced by the delay); Abe K. v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Appeal No.
0120141252 (Nov. 4, 2016) (declining to sanction an agency that issued a
decision after approximately 326 days when complainant failed to show that
he was prejudiced by the delay); Jocelyn R. v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal
No. 0120152852 (Mar. 11, 2016) (citing Vunder v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 01A55147 (May 12, 2006) (declining to sanction an agency that
issued a decision after approximately 371 days)); Anthony M. v. Dep't of the
Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 2019003380 (Sept. 22, 2020). The Commission
finds that there is no evidence that the Agency's delay in this case is
attributable to contumacious conduct or bad faith. As such, under the
specific circumstances present, we decline to sanction the Agency for its
delay in issuing the final decision.

While we will not impose a sanction in the present case, we do find the
Agency's failure to abide by the regulations reflects negatively on the
Agency's support for the integrity of the EEO process. Beatrice B. v. Dep't of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001641 (Sept. 17, 2020) (The
Commission declined to issue a sanction where following a supplemental
investigation, the Agency delayed in issuing a final decision for over eight
months). As a result, we will notify Federal Sector Programs (FSP) which
monitors the federal agencies' EEO programs of the Agency's failure to
comply with the regulations regarding the timely issuance of final agency
decisions.

Sufficiency of the Investigation and Adequacy of the Record

Complainant contends he was not given a fair opportunity to litigate his case
because the EEO investigator did not contact witnesses or request
documents that Complainant suggested could support his claim and the
EEOC AJ denied Complainant adequate discovery. However, Complainant
acknowledges the EEO investigator sought documentation of reasonable
accommodations approvals and denials by Chief Information Officer within
the past two years. He has not explained how the witnesses he identified
and the documents regarding the employees he alleged to be comparators
would provide any further relevant information.
                                     12                          2022002961

The record already contains information regarding the circumstances under
which other employees under the supervisor of Chief Information Officer
were provided telework. Thus, Complainant has not shown that the
investigation was inadequate.

As for discovery, the record reflects that Complainant declined to request
discovery during the time frame set forth by the EEOC AJ. Complainant
argues that he was unrepresented at this time, but our regulations provide
that complainants shall at all times be responsible for proceeding with the
complaint whether or not they have designated a representative. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.605(e). Although the AJ denied Complainant’s request for written
discovery after the deadline, when Complainant had obtained
representation, Complainant could have proceeded to a hearing where he
would have had the right to call witnesses and cross-examine witness called
by the Agency. While represented by counsel, he chose to withdraw his
hearing request and waive his right to examination of witnesses by
requesting the Agency issued a final decision on the written record.

Complainant has not identified specific information missing from the record
before us that is material to the facts in dispute in this case. Therefore, we
find the investigation and record to be sufficient to make a determination on
his claims.

Failure to State a Claim (Claim 1)

The regulation set forth at 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) provides, in relevant
part, that an agency shall dismiss a complaint that fails to state a claim. An
agency shall accept a complaint from any aggrieved employee or applicant
for employment who believes that she has been discriminated against by
that agency because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or
disabling condition. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.103, .106(a). An “aggrieved
employee” is one who suffers a present harm or loss with respect to a term,
condition, or privilege of employment for which there is a remedy. Diaz v.
Dep't of the Air Force, EEOC Request No. 05931049 (Apr. 21, 1994). Terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment include, inter alia, promotion,
demotion, discipline, reasonable accommodation, appraisals, awards,
training, benefits, assignments, overtime, leave, tours of duty, etc. Cobb v.
Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05970077 (March 13, 1997);
Becerra v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC DOC 0120083490 (Jan. 13, 2012).
                                     13                         2022002961

Complainant’s formal complaint alleged discrimination when he received an
email from Chief Information Officer that he would not receive his midyear
review. He did not allege that he never received a midyear review; instead
his allegations center on receiving an email indicating he would not receive
one. Here, even assuming that Complainant never received a midyear
performance review 3, he has not alleged that he suffered a personal harm as
a result. Receiving an email, without more, does not constitute a present
harm or loss. Additionally, the Commission has repeatedly held that periodic
progress reviews with no permanent effect do not create a personal harm.
Collin R. v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0120161159 (June 28, 2018)
(finding that a claim that complainant was issued a “poor” interim appraisal
evaluation failed to state a claim where complainant presented no evidence
of a personal harm). The cases cited by Complainant on appeal are
distinguishable because they involve complaints where the complainants
received negative midyear reviews. That is not the case here. Complainant
also alleged he had not been offered a fair opportunity for a possible
promotion, but a possible promotion concerns speculative and possible
future harm. Complainant has not alleged a present injury. Accordingly, the
absence of an actual present harm dictates the conclusion that Complainant
has failed to state a claim. See Gregorio S. v. National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, EEOC Appeal No. 2022004943 (Nov. 28, 2022).

Failure to Accommodate (Claim 2)

An agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known
physical and mental limitations of an individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29
C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p). In order to establish that she was denied a
reasonable accommodation, Petitioner must show that: (1) she is an
individual with a disability as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) she is
“qualified” as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed
to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance
on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation),
No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002).




3
  The record reflects Complainant was given a midyear review. However,
since the Agency dismissed for failure to state a claim and we affirm on
those grounds, we will not address the merits of the claim.
                                     14                         2022002961

Protected individuals are entitled to reasonable accommodation, but they are
not necessarily entitled to their accommodation of choice. Castaneda v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01931005 (Feb. 17, 1994). The agency may
choose among reasonable accommodations as long as the chosen
accommodation is effective.

Here, even assuming Complainant was a qualified individual with a disability,
he has failed to explain how the Agency failed to provide him with an
effective reasonable accommodation. Complainant admits that the Agency
“ultimately granted” his request for a reasonable accommodation of
telework, but he argues that the Agency did not act reasonably in not
granting his request until over a month after he first made the request and
submitted medical documentation to support it. According to Complainant,
this delay was unnecessary and resulted in Complainant using fifteen more
days of medical leave than he should have been required to take.
Complainant asserts the need for additional documentation was unnecessary
to verify the existence of his disability and the need for accommodation.

In determining whether there has been an unnecessary delay in responding
to a request for reasonable accommodation, relevant factors would include:
(1) the reason(s) for the delay, (2) the length of the delay, (3) how much
the individual with a disability and the employer each contributed to the
delay, (4) what the employer was doing during the delay, and (5) whether
the required accommodation was simple or complex to provide. Enforcement
Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation, at FN. 38.

We reject Complainant's assertion that the Agency unreasonably delayed
things or that the Agency's request for additional documentation was
improper. Under the Commission's guidelines, an agency may request
additional information when presented with a request for reasonable
accommodation     in   order  to   evaluate an   employee's   proposed
accommodation in comparison to his current medical needs in order to
determine what accommodation would best serve the needs of the agency
and employee. See Augustine P. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No.
2023002365 (Jul. 30, 2024; Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable
Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities
Act (Reasonable Accommodation Enforcement Guidance), EEOC Notice No.
915.002 at Question 6 (October 17, 2002).

Here, Complainant mentioned to Chief Information Officer that he would be
undergoing surgery, and they discussed the possibility of telework, but at
that time there was no specific surgery date scheduled.
                                     15                          2022002961

Complainant did not provide any documentation when he informed Chief
Information Officer that he had a specific surgery date scheduled. Therefore,
on August 1, 2018, knowing that Complainant had said he would be
undergoing surgery on August 7, 2018, Chief Information Officer requested
both a note for Complainant’s sick leave during the surgical period and a
letter regarding his return to work and suggested accommodations.
Complainant did not reply until after close of business on August 6, 2018.
The doctor’s note provided by Complainant on August 6, 2018 states that
Complainant will be undergoing surgery and have lifting restrictions
afterwards, but that Complainant may telework beginning August 9, 2018
through September 20, 2018. It is not clear from the note why telework is
necessary to accommodate a lifting restriction or how that would effectively
accommodate a lifting restriction. In fact, when additional information was
provided by Complainant’s physician in late August, he indicated that
Complainant could work for “any setting (home, office, etc) as long as his
activity restrictions are followed.” Additionally, the Commission has
consistently held that while employees are entitled to an effective reasonable
accommodation, they are not entitled to the accommodation of their choice
and agencies may choose among effective accommodations. Cristobal F. v.
Dep’t of Energy, EEOC Appeal No. 2024001281 (Jul. 29, 2024). Therefore, it
was reasonable for the Agency to request additional information. This then
created a delay while the Agency waited for a response. As noted,
Complainant responded after close of business on August 6, 2018, and on
August 9, 2018, after seeking input from Human Resources, the Agency sent
Complainant a letter seeking additional information. Complainant did not
provide any additional information until August 30, 2018 and September 4,
2018. The Agency then approved telework as a reasonable accommodation
on September 7, 2018. Thus, the bulk of the delay was caused by
Complainant. Complainant asserts that it was obvious that he was in pain
when he returned to work in person. However, again, it is not obvious what
accommodations would be most effective in allowing Complainant to work
without pain. Based on the foregoing, we do not find that Complainant was
denied a reasonable accommodation or that the Agency unreasonably
delayed in providing one.

Disparate Treatment (Claim 2)

In addition to a claim for failure to accommodate, Claim 2 also gives rise to
a claim of disparate treatment. A claim of disparate treatment based on
indirect evidence is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated
in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).
                                     16                          2022002961

For Complainant to prevail, he or she must first establish a prima facie case
of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give
rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration
was a factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411
U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The
burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Once the Agency has met its burden, Complainant bears the
ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St.
Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

To establish a prima facie case of disparate treatment discrimination based
on disability, a complainant generally must prove the following elements: (1)
they are an individual with a disability as defined in 29 C.F.R. §§
1614.203(a) and 1630.2(g); (2) they are “qualified” as defined in 29 C.F.R.
§§1614.203(a) and 1630.2(m); (3) the agency took an adverse action
against them; and (4) there was a causal relationship between their
disability and the agency’s actions. See Annamarie F. v. Department of the
Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 2021004539 (August 17, 2023).

In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on race, sex,
and/or national origin, complainant may show: (1) that he is a member of a
protected group; (2) that he was subjected to an adverse employment
action; and (3) that he was treated less favorably than other similarly
situated employees outside of his protected groups. We note that it is not
necessary for complainant to rely strictly on comparative evidence in order
to establish an inference of discriminatory motivation necessary to support a
prima facie case. O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., 517 U.S.
308, 312 (1996); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on O'Connor v. Consolidated
Coin Caterers Corp., EEOC Notice No. 915.002, n. 4 (September 18, 1996).

Here, Complainant has not established the required causal relationship or
that he was treated less favorably than other similarly situated employees
outside his protected classes. To be a valid comparator, all relevant aspects
of the comparator's work situation must be nearly identical to Complainant's
situation. See Martinez v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No.
0120113436 (Nov. 1, 2011) (finding comparators were not similarly situated
when they had different supervisors and/or a different chain of command
than complainant). Complainant identified four comparators during the
investigation that he believes were treated more favorably. However, two of
those comparators did not report to Chief Information Officer.
                                      17                          2022002961

Therefore, those two comparators are not similarly situated. On appeal,
Complainant reiterated that Comparator 1 and Comparator 2 (both IT
Specialists supervised by Chief Information Officer like Complainant) were
granted telework. However, even Complainant acknowledges that neither
comparator was granted telework for multiple consecutive full days or for
their own disability. He acknowledges that Comparator 1 was granted 30
minutes of telework during the day to care for his child while his wife was
deployed, and that Comparator 2 was granted 10 hours of telework per
week to care for her husband. In fact, the record reflects that Comparator 2
sought multiple consecutive days of telework and was denied. She was
granted 10 hours of telework per week for two pay periods, but she was
found not entitled to a reasonable accommodation. (ROI, pp. 206-208).
Thus, Complainant has not identified any comparators who were granted
multiple consecutive weeks of full-time telework. Chief Information Officer
also testified that she usually requires documentation for more than two
consecutive days of ad hoc telework. Further, Comparator 1 is a male and
Comparator 2 is White. Because Complainant has not established a causal
connection between his disability and the Agency’s actions and he has not
established that similarly situated employees outside his protected class
were treated more favorably, Complainant has not established a prima facie
case of disparate treatment based on disability, race, sex, or national origin.

For a reprisal claim, a complainant may establish a prima facie case by
showing that: (1) he engaged in a protected activity; (2) the agency was
aware of the protected activity; (3) subsequently, he was subjected to
adverse treatment by the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the
protected activity and the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Dep't of the Air
Force, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000). Complainant can
establish a prima facie case of reprisal by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination. Shapiro
v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996) (citing
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802). In general, a complainant can
demonstrate a causal connection using temporal proximity when the
separation between the employer's knowledge of the protected activity and
the adverse action is very close. See Clark County School District v.
Breeden, 532 U.S. 268 (2001) (holding that a three-month period was not
proximate enough to establish a causal nexus).

Here, Complainant stated in both EEO Counseling and his formal EEO
complaint that reprisal was a basis for discrimination, but he declined to
specify the protected activity that he believed was the basis for retaliation
during either during counseling or in his complaint.
                                      18                          2022002961

He also did not challenge the framing of the complaint until after he
requested a hearing and sought to amend his claims. On appeal,
Complainant identifies his protected activity as “EEO”. We do find the Agency
erred in not accepting reprisal as a basis for Complainant’s complaint.
However, the record before is sufficient to make a determination on the
reprisal claim because even assuming for the sake of argument that
Complainant had prior EEO activity, Complainant did not establish a prima
facie case of reprisal discrimination. However, there is nothing to suggest
that the Agency was aware of his EEO activity at the time the events in
Claim 2 occurred or that there is any sort of causal connection between
Complainant’s EEO activity and the Agency’s actions.

Even if Complainant had proved one or more of his prima facie cases, we
find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions. As discussed above, the Agency requested additional information to
evaluate    Complainant’s     reasonable    accommodation      request   and
Complainant’s request was granted after he provided sufficient
documentation.

Complainant has not shown that the Agency’s actions were pretext to mask
discrimination or retaliation. Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such
weaknesses,       implausibilities,   inconsistencies,   incoherencies,      or
contradictions in the Agency's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that
a reasonable fact finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence.
Opare-Addo v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (Nov. 20,
2007), req. for reconsid. den'd EEOC Request No. 0520080211 (May 30,
2008). A complainant’s generalized testimony alleging a subjective belief
that a particular action was motivated by discrimination is insufficient to
show pretext. See Perry v. Dep't of Hous. & Urban Dev., EEOC Appeal No.
01A54957 (Jan. 4. 2006).

Complainant asserts that employees supervised by Chief Information Officer
already teleworked one day per week and that Comparator 1 and
Comparator 2 were permitted to telework for reasons other than disability.
However, as discussed above, Comparator 2 was denied the type of telework
that Complainant requested and was ultimately granted (consecutive days of
full-time telework, and Comparator 1 was also not granted this type of
telework. Additionally, as mentioned above, Comparator 2 had to request
her 10 hours per week of telework in advance and also provide
documentation to substantiate the need for it each week. (ROI, pp. 206-
208).
                                     19                          2022002961

Also as discussed above, Complainant’s need for accommodation was not
obvious, therefore we do not find that the Agency’s proffered reasons for
their actions are unworthy of credence.

The pretext inquiry is not concerned with bad judgment, impeccability,
dislike, or a mistake. Marvin W. v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No.
0120170438 (Dec. 12, 2018). The question is not whether the agency made
the best, or even a sound, business decision; it is whether the real reason is
discrimination. See, e.g., Chavez v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0120055246 (Jan. 5, 2007); see also Carson v. Bethlehem Steel
Corporation, 82 F.3d 157, 159 (7th Cir. 1982) (noting that “the question is
not whether the employer made the best, or even a sound, business
decision; it is whether the real reason [was discriminatory]”). Mere
assertions or conjecture that an agency's explanation is a pretext for
intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief, however
genuine, does not constitute evidence of pretext. Further, at all times the
ultimate burden of persuasion remains with Complainant to demonstrate by
a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency was motivated by
prohibited discrimination.” Alameda B. v. Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal
No. 0120181968 (Sept. 24, 2019). Complainant has not done so here.

                                CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final
decision of the Agency finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                       RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
     1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
        material fact or law; or
     2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
          policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision.
                                     20                          2022002961

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in
support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed together
with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20)
calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision.
                                       21                           2022002961

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint
the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying
that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in
the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which
you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 27, 2024
Date
