           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Sulema B.,1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                             Carlos Del Toro,
                                Secretary,
                          Department of the Navy,
                                 Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2020003648

                        Agency No. 18-66001-02366

                                  DECISION

Complainant timely filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s May 5, 2020, final decision concerning her equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Equal Pay Act of 1963
(EPA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d) et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS this
matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation.

                             ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the Agency properly determined that it did not violate the Equal
Pay Act, and that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination based on
her national origin, race, or sex as she alleged.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                          2020003648

                               BACKGROUND

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as an Engineer, Contracting
Support Manager, ND-0854-04, for the Contract Support Management (CSM)
Office, Product and System Production Branch (PSPB), Fleet Modernization
and Installation Division of the Pacific Space and Naval Warfare Systems
Center in San Diego, California. Report of Investigation (ROI), at 6, 17. 2
Complainant transferred to another branch, Code 41250, on March 18, 2018.
ROI, at 466-467. She retained the same position in Code 41250. Id.

The Branch Supervisor (male, Caucasian) served as Complainant’s first-level
supervisor, and the Deputy for Operations was assigned as Complainant’s
second-level supervisor. These officials served as Complainant’s supervisors
until Complainant voluntarily accepted a transfer to another branch at the
same position and grade-level. ROI, at 413. The Deputy of Logistics was
assigned as Complainant’s third-level supervisor.

Complainant asserted that, on January 11, 2017, the Deputy of Operations
included negative, false comments in her mid-year performance review.
Complainant asserted that the Deputy of Operations specifically wrote that
“her tasks are routine”, “her work is below her pay grade”, and she
struggled with both written and oral communication. Id. at 415- 416.

The Branch Supervisor believed that the Deputy of Operations’ statement
signified her belief that Complainant was not performing at the expected
performance level. The Deputy of Logistics attested that it was reported that
Complainant performed mostly administrative work, below the ND-4 grade-
level, and there were quality concerns with her work. According to the
Deputy of Operations, during her mid-year review meeting with
Complainant, Complainant said that she wanted to work on her master’s
degree and that she was fine with the level of work that she was doing. Id.
at 475.

Complainant also attested that on June 15, 2017, the Branch Supervisor
stated in a meeting with her that Complainant’s “job is too easy”, “there are
other tasks more suited to [her] skill”, and her job was overpaid. Id. at 419.
In response, the Branch Supervisor averred that he asked Complainant why
someone at her grade level was performing data entry work, which was
work usually assigned to lower graded employees. Id. at 449.

2
  The page numbers refer to the Bates stamp numbers on the bottom right
of each page.
                                      3                          2020003648

The Branch Supervisor also averred that he told Complainant it would be
difficult to justify any significant pay increases based on her level of work.
Id.

On September 11, 2017, Complainant learned that she was given a very low
performance rating for the period ending on June 30, 2017, which caused
her not to receive a salary increase or a bonus for the rating period. Id. at
422-423. Complainant’s expected performance rating for her position was a
5.1. However, the Branch Supervisor rated Complainant at the “insufficient”
4.0 level. Id. at 450. Deputy of Operations explained that individuals must
reach expected performance levels. However, as Complainant was rated
below expected, in Zone 4, she was not eligible for a performance payout.
Id. at 478.

Thereafter, on October 17, 2017, Complainant was placed on a Performance
Development Assessment (PDA). Complainant was told that the PDA was an
initial step that could eventually lead to her being placed on a Performance
Improvement Plan (PIP). Id. at 425. Branch Supervisor explained any
employee who receives a rating below the employee’s expected score (i.e.
Complainant’s 4.0 instead of 5.1) receives a PDA to help bring the employee
back to an acceptable performance level. Branch Supervisor sent the PDA to
Complainant on October 18, 2017, noting that a PDA is a tool to help her
improve performance in areas he believed she performed unsatisfactorily.

Branch Supervisor explained that Complainant had problems communicating
with her project manager, and filling out the data for the Purchase Requests
(PRs). Moreover, when data was missing, she would stop working instead of
locating critical data. Id. at 451. Additionally, Branch Supervisor found that
Complainant had difficulty managing her tasks and priorities, and she
demonstrated issues working with others. Id. The Branch Supervisor
explained that Complainant was issued the PDA as a tool to help her improve
her performance. Id. at 452.

Thereafter, on October 18, 2017, Complainant asserted the Branch
Supervisor asked her to train her co-worker, Engineer, ND-0855-04, (CW1)
(male, Caucasian) to replace her. Id. at 427-428. The Deputy of Operations
acknowledged that Complainant was asked to train CW1 for approximately
two months and explained that this action was in anticipation of
Complainant’s requested transfer. Id. at 480.
                                     4                         2020003648

Complainant alleged, moreover, that on October 23, 2017, the Branch
Supervisor told her she had failed her PDA when she neglected to inform him
of her workload. Id. at 428-429. However, Complainant maintained that she
had emailed the required documents by the due date, but technical issues
prevented the Branch Supervisor from receiving her email. Id. The Branch
Supervisor responded that Complainant only failed one element of her PDA,
which was not a failure of the entire PDA. Id. at 453. On October 26, 2017,
the Branch Supervisor stated the Division Head ordered him to stop all
actions with regard to the PDAs of Complainant and another employee. Id.
at 454. The Division Head advised execution of PDAs at the time were
suspended until all employee relations matters were resolved. Id. at 521.

In addition, Complainant maintained that the Branch Supervisor completed a
negative supervisory assessment of her performance on February 15, 2018,
for her mid-year performance review. Id. at 46-47. Therein, the Branch
Supervisor wrote, among other things, that Complainant’s PRs were missing
information and documentation. Id. The Branch Supervisor noted that these
errors by Complainant resulted in returned PRs, which caused a thorough
review of all her PRs prior to releasing them into the workflow. Id.

On March 18, 2018, Complainant transferred to the Afloat Networks Branch
within CSM, but she retained the same salary and grade-level under ND-
0854-04. Id. at 197.

Complainant asserted that, on June 13, 2018, she learned that a male co-
worker, Engineer, ND-0855-04, (CW2) (male, Vietnamese) had less difficult
requirements in his PDA. Id. at 432. Branch Supervisor responded, however,
that the difference between the PDA of Complainant’s and the PDA of CW2,
was that Complainant was expected to improve her communication skills. Id.
at 454. He explained that he placed CW2 on a PDA because, like
Complainant, he received a rating lower than the expected performance
rating for his position. CW2 expected to receive a rating of 9. Instead, he
received a 7.

Complainant further alleged that her male co-workers, CW1 and CW2,
earned a higher salary than she did for performing the same CSM work.
Specifically, Complainant attested that CW1 and CW2 received the same
assignments and task orders, which were all equally difficult and important.
Complainant stated that CW1 and CW2’s CSM duties required the same
degree of responsibility as her duties and they all worked under the same
conditions.
                                      5                          2020003648

Complainant’s annual salary, as of April 5, 2018, was $81,388, while both
CW1’s and CW2’s annual salary was $98,317. Id. at 160-163, 168, 173.

According to Complainant, CW2 reached the top of the pay band for the
Engineer position in 2006, after 16 years in federal service. In comparison,
she had been in federal service for 17 years and still had not reached the top
level of the Engineer relevant pay band. Complainant’s Response to the
Supplemental Investigation, at DONSUP00015. Complainant believed that
she was more qualified to be paid at the top of the pay band than her male
counterparts, as she had previously held several high positions including the
following positions: Project Engineer, Project Lead, System Engineering
Lead, Project Manager, and Assistant Program Manager. Id. Additionally,
Complainant noted that a third male Engineer (CW3), who took over her
position after her transfer in March 2018, was also paid a higher salary.
Complainant maintained that CW3 started in federal service in 2001, which
was only one year before she started. Id.

On September 3, 2018, Complainant filed the instant formal EEO complaint,
as revised on September 4, 2018. Therein, Complainant claimed that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination and harassment based on race
(Asian), national origin (Vietnamese), and sex (female) when:

      1. On January 11, 2017, she received an untrue negative mid-
         year review, and therein the Deputy of Operations wrote that
         her “job is routine and way below the ND-04 level”;

      2. On June 15, 2017, the Branch Supervisor stated that her job
         was “too easy,” suggested that she get another job, and said
         her salary would never increase;


      3. On September 11, 2017, she learned that she was given a
         very low performance rating for the rating period ending on
         June 30, 2017, which caused her not to receive a salary
         increase or a bonus for that rating period;


      4. On October 17, 2017, she was placed on a Performance
         Development Assessment (PDA) based on untrue negative
         assessments, with the purpose to fire her;
                                    6                         2020003648

     5. On October 18, 2017, the Branch Supervisor asked her to
        train her co-worker, Engineer, ND-04, (CW1) (male,
        Caucasian) to replace her;


     6. On October 23, 2017, the Branch Supervisor stated that she
        failed her PDA, without providing an appropriate reason;


     7. On February 15, 2018, she received a negative mid-year
        review without proof, even though she provided evidence of
        her excellent performance;


     8. On June 13, 2018, she learned that a male co-worker,
        Engineer, ND-04, (CW2) (male, Vietnamese) had less difficult
        requirements in his PDA;


     9. On August 22, 2018, she learned that Branch Supervisor had
        never suggested that CW2 leave his job, or suggested his job
        was “too easy.”


     10. On April 5, 2018, she learned that her male co-worker,
        CW1, was paid a higher salary to do the same work; and


     11. On June 13, 2018, she learned that another male co-
        worker, CW2, was paid a higher salary to do the same work.

Following the investigation and supplemental investigation, the Agency
provided Complainant with a copy of the reports of investigation and notice
of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s
request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), finding no discrimination.

The Agency specifically found that Complainant did not establish that she
was subjected to a hostile work environment based on her protected classes.
In so finding, the Agency noted that Complainant failed to show that the
Agency was motivated by discriminatory animus based on her protected
classes.
                                     7                         2020003648

The Agency further found that Complainant did not show that the alleged
incidents were severe or pervasive enough to rise to the level of a hostile
work environment.

The Agency found, however, that Complainant established regarding claims
10 and 11, a prima facie case of sex-based pay discrimination under the
Equal Pay Act (EPA). Specifically, the Agency found that Complainant
received a lower salary than both CW1 and CW2. The Agency noted that
Complainant’s annual salary was $81,388, while the annual salary for CW1
and CW2 was $98,317. The Agency found that the Branch Supervisor
believed that Complainant, CW1, and CW2 performed substantially the same
job functions and duties, noting they took turns performing the same role
within the same system. The Agency noted that management requested that
Complainant train CW1 to enable him to replace her once she transferred
from the PSPB. Additionally, the Agency noted that the Branch Supervisor
agreed that Complainant performed the same tasks as CW1 and CW2.

The Agency found that Complainant’s education and experience were
comparable to both CW1 and CW2. The Branch Supervisor also verified that
Complainant possessed the same skills as CW1 and CW2. The Agency
determined that Complainant, CW1, and CW2 all performed the same work
for the same office, and that Complainant’s position included the same
responsibilities as CW1’s and CW2’s position.

The Agency found that Complainant established a prima facie case of sex-
based pay discrimination under the EPA.             The Agency, however,
nevertheless determined that it met its burden in showing that the pay
difference was based on a factor other than sex. Specifically, the Agency
reasoned that CW1 had already attained the full-performance level of ND-04
and assumed the trainee position to back-fill for Complainant who was in the
middle of the ND-04 paygrade performance level. According to the Agency,
when CW1 was identified as Complainant’s replacement, he had already
achieved his full performance level in ND-04. The Agency therefore reasoned
that the pay difference was the result of intra-agency cooperation to fill
Complainant’s position. The Agency noted that the situation would have
been the same if Complainant’s back-fill had been a female employee who
had already attained the full performance level.

Regarding CW2’s salary, the Agency noted that CW2 had been a federal
employee since 1990, while Complainant had only been a federal employee
since 2002. The Agency justified CW2’s higher salary at that time to his
having over a decade more time in federal service than Complainant.
                                     8                          2020003648

The Agency stated that CW2 reached the full performance level of the
paygrade in 2006, while Complainant was still in the middle of the
performance level for the ND-04 paygrade. Therefore, the Agency
determined that the pay difference was not due to sex but was the result of
CW2’s relative time in federal service.


                         CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant, through her attorney, argues that she received
negative assessments from management without any corroborating evidence
that her performance was below standard. Complainant argues further that
she was placed on the PDA based on untrue statements about her
performance with the purpose of adversely affecting her employment status.
Complainant contends that the Deputy of Operations unjustly said that her
work was comprised of “routine tasks” and that her level of work is “too far
below her grade”. Complainant also asserts that the Branch Supervisor
would yell at her, in an aggressive and disparaging manner, and would ask
her to leave her CSM position. Complainant maintains that her male
counterparts were treated more favorably, and their work was not similarly
discounted.

Regarding the equal pay issue, Complainant argues that the Agency failed to
meet its burden of establishing an affirmative defense with regard to the pay
disparity between her and CW1, CW2, and CW3. In addressing the salary of
CW1, although the Agency concluded that the pay disparity was the result of
intra-agency cooperation to backfill Complaint’s position, and contended that
the situation would have been the same if a female at the full performance
level were chosen, Complainant argues that the Agency has not presented
any evidence of other females earning the same salary as CW1 or the other
male comparators. With respect to the salary of CW2, Complainant asserts
that their service computation dates should be irrelevant, because they are
in the same pay band and perform the same work. She asserts, moreover,
that CW2 reached the top of the pay band after 16 years in federal service,
while she has been in federal service for 17 years and still has not reached
the top of the pay band. Additionally, Complainant notes the Agency failed to
address CW3, who replaced CW1 to take her position. According to
Complainant, CW3 was also paid at a higher salary even though he did not
know how to perform the tasks of the position when he was brought on by
management.
                                     9                          2020003648

In response, the Agency argues that it established legitimate,
nondiscrimination reasons for its actions, which Complainant did not show
were pretextual based on her protected classes. The Agency additionally
argues that Complainant did not show that any of its actions were motivated
by discriminatory animus, and therefore she cannot establish that she was
subjected to a hostile work environment. The Agency also asserts that the
comments and conversations directed toward Complainant were simply
designed to address her performance related issues, and there were no
comments directed towards Complainant’s protected classes.

In addressing the salary of CW1, the Agency notes that he was only
temporarily assigned to Complainant’s section. Further, CW1 was in a
different job series, from a different organization, and rated and supervised
by a completely separate chain-of-command. With regard to CW2’s salary,
the Agency reiterates that it is undisputed he had worked in federal service
for 12 years more than Complainant, joined federal service at a higher
paygrade, and had completely different assignments and evaluators for
much of his career.

Additionally, the Agency argues Complainant for the first time on appeal
alleges an EPA violation as it relates to CW3 and this claim was not
accepted, investigated nor is it proper for adjudication on appeal.

                          STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).            See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).
                                     10                          2020003648

                         ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Equal Pay Act

We first address Complainant's contention that the Agency violated the EPA.
The United States Supreme Court articulated the requirements for
establishing a prima facie case of discrimination under the EPA in Corning
Glass Works v. Brennan. 417 U.S. 188 (1974). To establish a prima facie
case of a violation under the EPA, a complainant must show that she or he
received less pay than an individual of the opposite sex for equal work,
requiring equal skill, effort, and responsibility, under similar working
conditions within the same establishment. Sheppard v. EEOC, EEOC Appeal
No. 01A02919 (Sep. 12, 2000), req. for recons. den’d, EEOC Request No.
05A10076 (Aug. 12, 2003).

Once a complainant has met this burden, an employer may avoid liability
only by showing that the difference in pay is justified under one of the four
affirmative defenses set forth in the EPA: (1) a seniority system; (2) a merit
system; (3) a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of
production of work (also referred to as an incentive or piecework system);
or, (4) a differential based on any factor other than sex. Id.

The EPA permits a compensation differential based on a factor other than
sex. To establish this defense, an Agency must establish that a gender-
neutral factor, applied consistently, in fact explains the compensation
disparity. EEOC Compliance Manual, Chapter 10: Compensation
Discrimination, No. 915.003, (EEOC Compliance Manual) at 10-IV
(December 5, 2000). The Agency must also show that the factor is related to
job requirements or otherwise is beneficial to the Agency's business and
used reasonably in light of the Agency's stated business purpose as well as
its other practices. Id.; Complainant v. Dep't of Homeland Security, EEOC
Appeal No. 0720040139, req. for recons. den’d, 0520070616 (July 25,
2007).

“Employers can offer higher compensation to applicants and employees who
have greater education, experience, training, or ability where the
qualification is related to job performance or otherwise benefits the
employer's business.” EEOC Compliance Manual at 10-IV. The Commission
has noted that such a qualification would not justify higher compensation if
the employer was not aware of it when it set the compensation, or if the
employer does not consistently rely on such a qualification. Id.
                                     11                          2020003648

Furthermore, the difference in education, experience, training, or ability
must correspond to the compensation disparity. Id. The Commission has
recognized that continued reliance on pre-hiring qualifications is less
reasonable the longer the lower paid employee has performed at a level
substantially equal to, or greater than, his or her counterpart. Id.

In the present case, the Agency acknowledged that Complainant established
a prima facie case of discrimination under the Equal Pay Act, as Complainant
received a lower salary than CW2. Therefore, we shall address whether the
Agency met its burden of establishing an affirmative defense for the pay
disparity.

Regarding CW2, the Agency argues that it met its burden in showing that
the pay differential was based on a factor other than sex. Specifically, the
Agency highlights that CW2 had been a federal employee since 1990, while
Complainant had only been a federal employee since 2002. The Agency
determined that CW2’s higher salary was due to his additional time in
federal service, which is more than a decade longer than Complainant’s
federal service. However, according to Complainant, CW2 reached the top of
the pay band in 2006 after 16 years in federal service, while she has been in
federal service for 17 years and had yet to reach the top level of their pay
band.

The EPA permits a compensation differential based on a seniority system.
To the extent the Agency is asserting that experience is a seniority system,
the record is devoid of evidence as to how its seniority system works or how
its employees' salaries specifically increased over their tenure. Without more
information, based on the facts of this case, the Commission will not
generally conclude that additional years of experience justify such a pay
disparity or that the Agency has satisfied its burden of establishing an
affirmative defense.

The record reflects that Complainant held the same position as CW2; she
had also worked for the Agency for a significant length of time, since August
12, 2002; and Complainant alleged she actually had more duties and
responsibilities than CW2. Again, the record is devoid of more information
regarding the differences in Complainant and CW2’s job duties. We note, like
Complainant, CW2 was also placed on a PDA for performance reasons.
Nevertheless, Complainant was being paid a lesser salary.
                                     12                          2020003648

The record is also inconclusive as to the pay disparity between Complainant
and CW1 and CW3. With regard to CW1, CW1’s administrative organization
agreed to pay him to move within the Agency, and that process involved him
assuming duties that Complainant performed even though she had not
attained his performance level in the ND-04 paygrade. The Agency explained
the pay difference was the result of “intra-agency cooperation to fulfill
PSPB’s CSM function.” The Agency maintained the situation would have been
the same if Complainant’s back-fill had been a female employee.

As an affirmative defense to the pay disparity between Complainant and
CW1, it seems the Agency is making an argument under the “red-circling”
theory. Under the EPA and the EEOC Compliance Manual, the “factor other
than sex” defense “encompasses a wide array of possible factors.” EEOC
Compliance Manual at 10-IV (December 5, 2000). "Red circling" means that
an employee is paid a higher than normal compensation rate for a particular
reason. See EEOC Compliance Manual at 10-IV.F.e. Such a practice does not
violate the EPA if sex is not a factor and it is supported by a valid business
reason.

To successfully assert the defense, the employer must offer “a gender-
neutral factor, applied consistently” that is “related to job requirements or
otherwise is beneficial to the employer's business.” EEOC Compliance
Manual, 10-IV.F. Thus, an agency could defend its decision as a red circle
rate if it met the Compliance Manual examples or if it met the requirements
of the broader factor other than sex defense. Zieff v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No, 0720040139 (May 7, 2007)(the Commission found
the Agency’s practice of red-circling rates was in accord with EEOC
Compliance Manual). If the red-circling defense is satisfied, the employer
may continue to pay the employees their original salaries, even though
opposite sex employees perform the same work for lower pay. Here,
however, the record is devoid of any information as to how this intra-agency
transfer occurred or information on CW1’s pay prior to transferring into the
CSM role.

With regard to CW3, the Agency fails to address in the final decision the
disparity in pay and any experience or duties between the two employees in
the final decision. On appeal, the Agency argues unequal pay claims as they
relate to CW3 should be barred as the Agency argues Complainant first
raised them on appeal.
                                              13                             2020003648

We find the Agency’s argument to be flawed as the investigative file included
an affidavit from CW3 and an SF-50 for CW3 from the relevant time.
However, management officials or CW3’s statements did not address CW3’s
role, duties, or qualifications during the time at issue. Complainant alleged
on appeal CW3 replaced CW1 to take on the CSM position, which was
previously Complainant’s position. A review of the SF-50 provided for CW3
shows he was paid more than Complainant but his occupational code was
different than Complainant. The investigative record fails to address what
CW3’s duties, qualifications, and skills were during the relevant time.
Without more information on the different positions and roles CW3 had
compared to Complainant, or the difference in occupational codes, we
cannot evaluate whether Complainant made a prima facie case under the
EPA with regard to CW3.

Upon review, we find that the investigative record contains inadequate
reasoning for the pay disparity and the instant record lacks information
regarding how the salary of Complainant, or the comparators, was set. See
chart below:

Employees     Salary3       Alleged Factors          Do Proffered Reasons Explain
                            Affecting Salary                     Disparity?
Complainant $101,919.00 Yrs. of service: 15      No, Complainant was performing
(Protected                                       substantially similar tasks to other male
                        *Information regarding
Class)                  performance rating is    employees who were paid more.
                        unclear/missing from the Complainant stated she had the years in
                        record for Complainant service to warrant the top pay band like
                        as well as CW1, CW2,     CW2 but had yet to reach that level.
                        and CW3 for the
                        relevant period. This    *We note Complainant’s occupational
                                                 code on her SF-50 is different than
                        includes any explanation
                        as to why “expected      CW1, CW2, and CW3. This distinction
                                                 was not explained, especially when CW2
                        ratings” were different
                        for each employee and was performing substantially similar
                        the record fails to      tasks per the Agency
                        address how employees
                        expected vs. actual
                        ratings are formulated.
 CW1        $123,117.00 Yrs. of service: 11         Vague reasons – CW1 was moved as a
(Not in                                            part of “intra-agency cooperation” but
Protected                                          record fails to explain CW1’s prior salary
Class)                                             or qualifications to categorize under red-


3
 Based on SF-50s provided for employees, dated January 7, 2018. Years of
experience calculated from the same SF-50s from “service computation
date” up until January 7, 2018.
                                          14                             2020003648

                                               circle theory. Information on his duties
                                               during the relevant time as compared to
                                               Complainant inconclusive.
 CW2        $123,117.00 Yrs. of service: 27     Somewhat– CW2 had more years of
(Not in                                        federal service and his seniority required
Protected                                      him to take on more “complex and
Class)                                         analytical tasks” per management but
                                               CW2 stated Complainant had more tasks
                                               than he did; while he was also on a PDA,
                                               he scored higher on performance rating;
                                               Complainant was earning more
                                               performance bonuses than CW2 because
                                               CW2 maxed out on the career ladder
 CW3        $123,117.00 Yrs. of service: 16    No – record is devoid of information as
(Not in                                        to CW3’s experience, role, performance
Protected                                      rating, and salary during the relevant
Class)                                         time



The Commission notes the Agency does not provide any specific reasonable
explanation for why CW2’s salary was higher than Complainant’s salary. The
record fails to explain Complainant and comparator’s expected performance
levels and how the calculations were determined (i.e. CW2 expected a rating
of 9, received a 7; Complainant expected a rating of 5.1 but received a 4 but
both were in “Zone 4” and were given a PDA per Deputy of Operations).
Additionally, there is no explanation as to what the full-performance level of
ND-04 was, or why Complainant failed to meet it while CW1 did so, and why
CW1 was selected as her replacement (Claim 5). Moreover, information on
CW1’s prior salary or qualifications to support a red-circle defense.

In sum, we determine that the Agency has proffered insufficiently specific
evidence in the investigation to fully evaluate the pay disparity, as reflected
in its reference to “intra-agency cooperation” which does not go to the heart
of the matter: whether Complainant was paid less than male counterparts
for doing the same work.

Without more information, we remand the complaint for supplementation of
the record so the Commission may determine whether Complainant was
subjected to an EPA violation, or the Agency met its burden to establish an
affirmative defense.
                                       15                           2020003648

Disparate Treatment (Claims 1,3, 4, & 7)

Next, we turn to Complainant's claims that she was subjected to pay
discrimination under Title VII based on her sex, national origin, and race. In
situations such as this, where the jurisdictional prerequisites of both the EPA
and Title VII are satisfied, any violation of the EPA is also a violation of Title
VII. 29 C.F.R. § 1620.27; EEOC Compliance Manual at footnote 87. In the
present case, we noted Complainant established a prima facie case of sex
discrimination by showing that she was paid less than CW2, a similarly
situated male employee. However, for reasons explained above, we are
remanding the matter for supplementation of the record as to the pay
disparity and the Agency’s explanation for such disparity.

With regard to disparate treatment based on race or national origin, claims
of disparate treatment are examined under the analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Hochstadt v.
Worcester Found. for Experimental Biology, Inc., 425 F. Supp. 318, 324 (D.
Mass.), aff'd, 545 F.2d 222 (1st Cir. 1976). For Complainant to prevail, she
must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts
that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination,
i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978); McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13. Once Complainant has established a prima
facie case, the burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). If the Agency is successful, the burden
reverts back to Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Agency's reason(s) for its action was a pretext for
discrimination. At all times, Complainant retains the burden of persuasion,
and it is her obligation to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the
Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v.
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993); U.S. Postal Service v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711,
715-716 (1983).

To establish a prima facie case of disparate treatment, a complainant must
show that: (1) they are a member of a protected class; (2) they were
subjected to an adverse employment action concerning a term, condition, or
privilege of employment; and (3) they were treated differently than similarly
situated employees outside their protected class, or there was some other
evidentiary link between membership in the protected class and the adverse
employment action. See Nanette T. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0120180164 (March 20, 2019); McCreary v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal No.
                                      16                          2020003648

0120070257 (Apr. 14, 2008); Saenz v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Request No.
05950927 (Jan. 9, 1998).

Complainant is challenging her performance ratings and awards based on
her ratings. As discussed above, the record is devoid of information as to
how Complainant’s “expected” or how actual ratings were formulated. An
employee’s rating determined whether the employee was placed on a PDA,
which is the root of Complainant’s claims. Additionally, there is no evidence
on how CW3, who was a transfer, was rated in order to establish pretext. As
discussed below, without supplementation, we cannot equitably review
Complainant’s claims.

Hostile Work Environment

In order to establish a prima facie case of harassment, Complainant must
prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of five elements:
(1) that she is a member of a statutorily protected class; (2) that she was
subjected to unwelcome conduct related to her protected class; (3) that the
harassment complained of was based on her protected class; (4) that the
harassment had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with her
work performance and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment; and (5) that there is a basis for imputing liability to the
employer. See Celine B. v. Dep't of Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001961
(Sept. 21, 2020); Humphrey v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
01965238 (Oct. 16, 1998). See also Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897
(11th Cir. 1982); Flowers v. Southern Reg'l Physician Serv. Inc., 247 F.3d
229 (5th Cir. 2001). The harasser's conduct should be evaluated from the
objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim's circumstances.
Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace, EEOC Notice No.
915.064 (April 29, 2024).

In other words, to prove her hostile work environment claim, Complainant
must establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe
or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant's position would
have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also
prove that the conduct was taken because of a protected basis; in this case,
her sex, race or national origin. Only if Complainant establishes both of
those elements -- hostility and motive -- will the question of Agency liability
present itself.
                                   17                        2020003648

Complainant belongs to protected classes based on her sex, race and
national origin and she was subjected to unwanted conduct. However,
Complainant must show a connection between a protected basis and the
complained of conduct. Complainant alleges a reasonable person would find
she was subjected to harassment because, while she was charged with more
tasks than CW2 and training CW1, she scored lower on performance ratings
than either CW2 or CW1. CW1 stated that Complainant would train him while
he used her computer. ROI, at 534. According to CW1, the initial plan was
that he would replace Complainant after she transferred.         However,
management ultimately decided not to retain CW1 in the position and so he
therefore did not replace Complainant. Id.

CW2 stated that he had been with CSM since May 2014, at the ND-0855-04
grade-level. He noted that, when they were in the same branch, he worked
directly with Complainant from October 1, 2017, through March 17, 2018.
According to CW2, he and Complainant performed exactly the same CSM
job. Id. at 541. In fact, CW2 believed that Complainant performed more
tasks than he did. Id. According to CW2, these extra tasks included
generating PowerPoint status reports and weekly presentations to the
Branch Head, among other assignments. Id. CW2 also recalled that Project
Leads would come directly to Complainant to ask for support. Id. CW2
additionally attested:

     I was totally surprised when I knew [Complainant] was
     compensated at a much lower level. At first, I thought she was
     joking about her compensates [sic]. I believe [Complainant]
     should be compensated as much as I was because we did
     exactly the same CSM job and [Complainant] even performed
     more tasks than I did. That is totally a shame because
     [Complainant] was treated differently.

Id. at 542. On the contrary, the Deputy of Logistics averred that
Complainant, CW1, and CW2 all performed similar duties and he was
ultimately responsible for determining their compensation, as he was the
pay pool manager. Id. at 517.

According to the Deputy of Operations, Complainant’s salary was less than
CW2’s because CW2 had been in CSM longer and was responsible for
bringing Complainant “up to speed” on how to perform CSM duties.
Supplemental Investigation, at 48. Because CW2 was more senior, he was
required to take-on more complex and analytical tasks. The Deputy of
Operations also noted:
                                       18                          2020003648

      I believe the difference in salary stems from how they both
      started in this organization. [Complainant] started as DP-01 in
      8/12/2002. [CW2] started as DP-03. Their salary increases
      throughout their career was [sic] based on their contributions.

Id. Deputy of Operations noted, in CW2’s self-assessment, CW2 noted he
was continuing to train Complainant as a new CSM team member in task
order processing. Id. Deputy of Operations also outlined additional functions
CW2 was executing at the time. Id. For these reasons, the record is unclear
as to the discrepancy in pay, performance evaluations, and tasks among the
CSM team.

Here, as discussed above, there is insufficient evidence. For instance,
majority of Complainant’s harassment claims center around her performance
evaluations and ratings. Yet, the record is unclear how Complainant and
CW2, two employees performing substantially similar duties, could have
different “expected” ratings. The record is unclear how “expected” versus an
employee’s actual ratings are formulated and by which management
officials. Additionally, it is unclear at what point a particular rating warrants
an employee to be placed on a PDA, like Complainant and CW2 were.
Without this information, we cannot determine whether a reasonable person
would find Complainant’s claims to be so severe or motivated by
discriminatory animus.

Accordingly, we remand Complainant’s disparate treatment claims and
harassment claims under Title VII as the information to be supplemented for
her EPA claims is inextricably intertwined with the other claims (i.e. how
evaluations and ratings occurred; expected ratings vary between employees
performing substantially similar roles).

While Complainant ultimately bears the burden to prove discrimination, it is
the burden of the Agency to have evidence or proof in support of its final
decision. See Marshall v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05910685
(Sept. 6, 1991). The Agency has not met its burden here. Based on the
foregoing, we find that the record is not sufficiently developed to make a
reasoned determination as to whether the Agency violation the Equal Pay
Act, discriminated against her or subjected her to harassment as she
alleged.
                                       19                       2020003648

                                 CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency's final decision, and we REMAND this
matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation in accordance with the
ORDER below.

                                    ORDER

Within sixty (60) days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency is
ORDERED to conduct a supplemental investigation to obtain evidence
consistent with this decision and relevant in assessing Complainant and
comparators noted pay disparity for EEO purposes as noted above.

The evidentiary record shall include, but is not limited to:

1. Affidavits from Agency management officials, including Division Head,
   Deputy of Operations, Branch Supervisor as well as management officials
   for CW1, CW2, and CW3 with regard to performance ratings, job
   duties/responsibilities, and pay during the relevant time for Complainant,
   CW1, CW2, and CW3. Documentation to Complainant, CW1, CW2, and
   CW3’s performance ratings- both formal rating and “expected vs. actual
   ratings” discussed above-for the relevant time period, as well has how
   those ratings were calculated in order to place an employee on a PDA or
   eliminate the employee from a pay band increase or performance payout.

2. The Agency shall address the disparity in occupational codes noted on
   Complainant’s SF-50, compared to other employees who performed
   similar tasks.

3. As noted above, elaboration and explanation shall extend merely beyond
   reference to “intra-agency cooperation” without more elaboration,
   particularly in the context of CW1, his prior experience and any evidence
   to warrant his higher pay when he had less years of service than
   Complainant.

4. The supplemental investigation shall include information on the Agency’s
   pay band scale, seniority system, performance scale and how individuals
   are rated (or expected to be rated) as it pertains to Complainant, CW1,
   CW2, and CW3. Specifics on how Complainant and CW2, who had
   substantially similar tasks per the Agency, had different “expected” and
   actual ratings during the relevant time period. Additionally, reasoning
   and expectations for Complainant and CW2 on their PDAs and how PDAs
                                      20                           2020003648

   impacted salary and performance ratings. This information goes to the
   heart of the hostile work environment and discrimination claims as well.

5. Explanation as to what the full-performance level of ND-04 was and how
   Complainant and comparators met or fell below expectations to warrant
   PDAs.

6. Explanation as to how Complainant and CW3 are similarly or not similarly
   situated, as well as disparity and explanation as to such for the relevant
   time.

The Agency shall then provide Complainant with an opportunity to respond
to the new evidence.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the
Complainant with a copy of the supplemental record and findings and shall
notify Complainant of the appropriate rights. If the Complainant requests a
final decision without a hearing, the Agency shall issue a final decision within
thirty (30) days of receipt of Complainant’s request, including appeal rights.

As provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's
Decision,” the Agency must send to the Compliance Officer: 1) a copy of the
Agency’s letter of acknowledgment to Complainant, 2) a copy of the
Agency’s notice that transmits the investigative file and notice of rights, and
3) either a copy of the complainant’s request for a hearing, or a copy of the
final agency decision (“FAD”) if Complainant does not request a hearing.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the
Agency shall give priority to this remanded case in order to comply with the
time frames contained in this Order. The Office of Federal Operations will
issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate
a complaint.

       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the
Commission’s corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar
days of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall
submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in
the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance
docket number under which compliance was being monitored.
                                      21                          2020003648

Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final
compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting
documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the
Complainant may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the right to file a civil
action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement.           See 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the
Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in
accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.”
29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in
42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files
a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of
the orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result
in the referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                       RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision.
                                     22                          2020003648

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in
support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed together
with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20)
calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                       23                          2020003648

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative
processing of your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you
have the right to file such action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your
complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you
file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that
person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the
dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which
you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.


 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION-EQUAL PAY ACT (Y0408)

You are authorized under section 16(b) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (29
U.S.C. § 216(b)) to file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction
within two years or, if the violation is willful, three years of the date of
the alleged violation of the Equal Pay Act regardless of whether you have
pursued any administrative complaint processing. The filing of the civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.


                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests.
                                       24                          2020003648

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).



FOR THE COMMISSION:



_______________________           Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 23, 2024
Date
