             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Williams S., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                   Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                          Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                               (Customs and Border Protection),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022004397

                               Agency No. HS-CBP-00611-2020

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s July 12, 2022 final
decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint claiming employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the reasons explained below, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s final decision properly found no discrimination regarding Complainant’s
claims that his request to work specified holidays was denied, and that he was issued a letter of
reprimand.

                                       BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Border Patrol Agent in
Calexico, California.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                   2022004397

On January 22, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him based on race (Hispanic), national origin (Mexican), color (Brown),
and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity. 2 By letter dated July 27, 2021, the Agency
determined that the formal complaint was comprised of the following claims:

         1.    On or about November 2019 or December 2019, [a named Agency official] directed
              Complainant to prepare a memorandum explaining why he missed Defensive Tactics
              and Law Training.

         2.   On December 18 and 19, 2019, Complainant’s request to work holidays (Christmas
              Eve 2019, Christmas 2019, and New Year’s Day 2020) was denied by [two named
              Agency officials].

         3. On May 15, 2020, Complainant was issued a letter of reprimand, charging him with
            missed overtime on October 26, 2019 and November 2019, and Absent Without
            Leave (AWOL) on November 25, 2019 and November 26, 2019.

         4. On August 4, 2020, Complainant was denied the opportunity to participate in the
            [Agency’s] off-site Physical Fitness (PTFIT) Program, by [a named Agency official].

         5. On September 10, 2020, Complainant was instructed to complete the Annual
            Firearms, Armor, and Credentials Tracking System Inventory, by noon on September
            16, 2020, and he was advised failure to follow instructions will result in corrective
            action.

         6.    On August 14, 2018, Complainant was denied the opportunity to participate in the
              [Agency’s] Physical Fitness Program.

         7. From November 23, 2019-November 27, 2019, Complainant’s request for annual
            leave was ignored.

         8. On November 27, 2019, [a named Agency official] who…informed Complainant he
            would be placed on AWOL status; and subsequently, on December 3, 2019, changed
            Complainant’s leave to AWOL, per [Deputy Patrol Agent’s] directive. ROI at 223-
            227.

The Agency accepted claims (1)-(5) for investigation. ROI at 224. However, the Agency
dismissed claims (6)-(8) on procedural grounds. ROI at 225-227.

2
    The record reflects that Complainant filed subsequent amendments to the formal complaint.
                                                     3                                        2022004397

Complainant’s does not expressly contest the dismissal of claims (6)-(8) on appeal. We
therefore decline to address these claims further herein. Complainant subsequently withdrew claims
(1), (4), and (5). ROI at 230. Thus, we further decline to address these claims further herein.

Concerning the remaining claims, the Agency’s investigation revealed the following evidence:

Claim (2)-Denied Request to Work Specified Holidays

The record contains a declaration under penalty of perjury from the Special Operations
Supervisor (Supervisor) during the period at issue. Therein, the Supervisor asserts regarding
Complainant’s claim that he was denied his request to work on specified holidays, that she
informed him that he had missed the deadline to request to work the holidays. ROI at 288. The
record contains an email from the Supervisor to Complainant dated December 18, 2019. ROI at
292. Therein, the Supervisor stated that the deadline to submit his request had passed and that
the schedule had already been approved and posted. The Supervisor further stated that
schedule requests “need to be submitted [no later than] the morning of the first Wednesday of
every pay period.” Id.

The record also contains a declaration under penalty of perjury from the Acting Patrol Agent in
Charge during the period at issue. Therein, he corroborates the Supervisor’s reasons for
Complainant’s request being denied. The Acting Patrol Agent in Charge sets forth that
Complainant’s request was not timely and the holiday schedule had been completed. ROI at
265.

Claim (3)-Letter of Reprimand

The record contains a declaration from the Agency official that proposed the action. Therein, he
asserted that he reviewed the information and determined that Complainant had missed assigned
overtime assignments and had been AWOL. ROI at 357. The record contains a copy of the
letter of proposed suspension, subsequently reduced to a letter of reprimand. ROI at 403-406.
Therein, the letter of proposed suspension sets forth that Complainant missed overtime
assignments and was designated as AWOL.

After the investigation into these claims, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). 3




3
 According to the Agency’s final decision, Complainant requested a final agency decision.
While we do not have a copy of Complainant’s request for a final decision in the record,
Complainant, on appeal, does not contest that he requested a final agency decision.
                                                4                                     2022004397

The Agency’s final decision found no discrimination was established as alleged. The Agency
did not address whether Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, but rather
found that the responsible management officials articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for claims (2) and (3). The Agency further found that Complainant failed to establish
that the Agency’s articulated reasons were pretext for discrimination and/or unlawful retaliation.
Final Agency Decision (FAD) at 7-8.

The instant appeal followed.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant does not submit a statement or brief in support of his appeal.

In response to the appeal, the Agency asserts that Complainant’s appeal is untimely filed. Even
if Complainant’s appeal is timely, the Agency asserts that we should affirm its final decision on
the merits finding no discrimination.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                           ANALYSIS

As an initial matter, we find that Complainant’s appeal is timely filed. The record reflects that
the Agency sent Complainant the final decision via email on July 13, 2022. Complainant filed
his appeal on August 14, 2022. The record is devoid of evidence of when Complainant actually
received the email containing the final agency decision. Based on the foregoing, we deem
Complainant’s appeal is timely filed.

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978).
                                                 5                                     2022004397

The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. See Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the
agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact
finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited
reason. See St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

A complainant may establish a prima facie case of discrimination by demonstrating: 1)
membership in a protected group; 2) that complainant was adversely affected by management’s
personnel decision or action; and 3) that complainant was treated less favorably than similarly
situated individuals outside of complainant’s protected groups. See e.g., Ricardo K. v. Dep't of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Decision No. 2019004809, (Dec. 10, 2020) (complainant failed to
establish a prima facie case of discrimination because complainant has not provided any
evidence or facts that give rise to an inference of unlawful discrimination based on complainant's
protected classes). Alternatively, a complainant may establish a prima facie case by establishing
the first two elements above and that there is some other evidentiary link between membership in
the protected class and the adverse employment action. Complainant v. Dep't of Navy, EEOC
Decision No. 0120113118, (Aug. 14, 2014) (prima facie case includes comparator element or it
“must present other evidence that supports an inference that the agency was motivated by
unlawful discrimination.”) (citing Alonzo v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0720070032
(Feb. 4, 2008)).

In the instant case, we find that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case on the bases of
race, color, and national origin. While Complainant is a member of specified protected classes
and was subject to adverse actions, Complainant did not prove that he was treated less favorably
than members outside of his protected classes, nor did he establish any other evidentiary link
between the adverse actions and his protected classes.

Complainant can establish a prima facie case of reprisal by showing that: (1) Complainant
engaged in protected activity; (2) the Agency was aware of the protected activity; (3)
subsequently, Complainant was subjected to adverse treatment by the Agency; and (4) a nexus
exists between the protected activity and the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Dep’t of the Air
Force, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000).

In the instant case, we find that Complainant also failed to establish a prima facie case of
reprisal. While Complainant asserts that he represented other employees in EEO cases in “front
of” management (ROI at 62), Complainant has not demonstrated a nexus between the protected
activity and the adverse treatment.

Even if Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and/or retaliation, we find,
as discussed in detail above, the Agency’s management witnesses articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions which Complainant failed to establish, by a
preponderance of evidence, were pretext for discrimination and/or retaliation.
                                               6                                    2022004397

Claim (2)-Denied Request to Work Specified Holidays

Regarding Claim (2), the Supervisor asserts that she informed Complainant that he had missed
the deadline to request to work the holidays. ROI at 288. This proffered explanation is bolstered
by an email from the Supervisor to Complainant, dated December 18, 2019, that stated that the
deadline to submit his request had passed and that the schedule had already been approved and
posted. The testimony of the Acting Patrol Agent in Charge corroborates the Supervisor’s
reasons for Complainant’s request being denied.

Complainant has failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were pretext for discrimination and/or retaliation. We concur with the
Agency’s final decision that a management official presented evidence that a Caucasian
comparator, named by Complainant as receiving more favorable treatment, was on leave and not
working during the holidays at issue. FAD at 8, ROI at 268-269, 283. Complainant has not
shown that other similarly situated employees outside of his protected classes (i.e. who, like
Complainant, submitted an untimely request to work specified holidays) were approved to work
the specified holidays.

Claim (3)-Letter of Reprimand

The Agency official who proposed the reprimand explained that he determined that Complainant
had missed assigned overtime assignments and had been AWOL. The record contains a copy of
the letter of proposed suspension detailing these reasons, which was subsequently reduced to a
letter of reprimand.

Again, Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were pretext for discrimination and/or retaliation. We concur with the
Agency that the record is devoid of evidence that a named Caucasian comparator did not report
for overtime assignments and took leave without it being approved by a supervisor and was not
disciplined. FAD at 8-9. Moreover, the record reflects that other Border Patrol Agents were
charged AWOL and received a written reprimand. ROI at 399.

                                        CONCLUSION

We AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination and/or unlawful retaliation
for the reasons discussed above.
                                               7                                    2022004397

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                               RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                                8                                     2022004397

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a
request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




____________________________             Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations

March 19, 2024
Date
