            U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Operations
                                 P.O. Box 77960
                            Washington, DC 20013


                                   Clement D.,1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                               Merrick B. Garland,
                                Attorney General,
                              Department of Justice
                           (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                     Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2024003112

                         Agency No. BOP-2023-000534

                                    DECISION

On April 12, 2024, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a), from the Agency’s March 15, 2024 final decision concerning an
equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint claiming employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII),
as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission REMANDS the Agency’s final decision.

                               ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s final decision properly determined that Complainant did
not prove discrimination as alleged.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                           2024003112

                                BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Senior
Officer Specialist, Grade GS-8, at the Agency’s Metropolitan Detention Center
in Los Angeles, California.

According to his answers to EEO interrogatories, on November 17, 2022,
Complainant was on duty at his post in the Control Room. His co-worker,
CO1, though assigned to the Front Lobby, was in the Control Room to eat
dinner. Another co-worker, CO2, who was assigned to the Control Room was
also present.

When the relief supervisor arrived in the Front Lobby, the relief supervisor
found that CO1 was not at his post. CO1 assailed Complainant for failing to
warn him about the relief supervisor’s presence. According to Complainant,
CO1 said words to the effect that “I should have known not to trust a queer
to watch my back.” (Complainant said that CO1 had previously made anti-
LGBTQ+ comments to him in the past, but Complainant had ignored these.)
CO1 then went to the Front Lobby to assist the relief supervisor with checking-
in to the facility.

Thereafter, Complainant stated that CO1 came back to the Control Room and
CO1 called Complainant “fucking faggot, fucking homo, and gay
motherfucker.” According to Complainant, CO2 laughed and repeated CO1’s
insults. Complainant stated that he asked CO1 to leave the Control Room,
but CO1 refused. Complainant said he called their supervisor, LT1, and
reported CO1’s unauthorized presence in the Control Room. LT1 instructed
Complainant to send CO1 to his office. Complainant relayed LT1’s message
to CO1. Complainant stated that, at this point, CO1 called Complainant a
snitch and said: "Meet me on the 7th floor of the parking structure, I'm going
to handle you." Complainant claims that, before CO1 left the Control Room,
CO1 delivered a karate-chop blow to Complainant’s neck. Complainant
described the strike as painful and causing him to step back in order to
maintain his balance. Complainant called the supervisor’s office and reported
that CO1 had struck him. LT1 then went to the Front Lobby to talk to CO1
while a second supervisor, LT2, came to the Control Room where LT2 observed
some redness on Complainant’s neck and took pictures thereof. Complainant
said that the supervisors who interviewed him after CO1 had struck him
advised Complainant to avoid leaving the facility at the same time as CO1.

LT1 reported the matter to his supervisor (CAPT). On the following day, a
Threat Assessment Committee was convened to address the matter.
                                      3                          2024003112

Following the Threat Assessment Committee, Complainant claimed that the
Agency took no corrective action and noted that CO1 remained in the same
position and shift. Complainant stated that he feared CO1 if he returned to
work. Complainant accused management of sharing CO1’s anti-LGBTQ+
attitude and of retaliating against him for “rocking the boat” by complaining
about discrimination in the workplace.

On November 23, 2022, Complainant went to the Los Angeles police to pursue
a restraining order against CO1. A Los Angeles police officer contacted CAPT
who would not discuss the assault because it was under investigation.
Thereafter, the Los Angeles police declined to investigate the Complainant’s
report of assault further because it was deemed a matter of federal
jurisdiction.

Complainant ceased returning to work after November 23, 2022. Complainant
filed a workers compensation claim for injuries from the assault that occurred
on November 17, 2022. As a part of his request for sick leave, Complainant
provided notes from his medical providers excusing his absence from work
between November 30, 2022, and January 10, 2023.

On December 29, 2022, Complainant initiated contact with the Agency’s EEO
Counselor.

In an email exchange dated January 2, 2023, Complainant and CAPT discussed
covering Complainant’s absence with Continuation of Pay (COP) benefits.
Complainant stated his understanding that until his worker's compensation
claim had officially been approved, he would not be covered by COP benefits.
Complainant stated he would use his sick leave balance and then his vacation
or annual leave to cover his absence.

On January 9, 2023, the Office of Workers Compensation Programs (OWCP)
rendered an initial denial of Complainant’s workers’ compensation claim.
Following OWCP’s denial, Complainant was paid COP benefits and he uses
annual or sick leave to cover his initial absences.

On February 9, 2023, CAPT requested Complainant update his status and
provide updated medical documentation. CAPT further advised Complainant
that he had just 39.5 hours of leave left and, after he exhausted that leave,
the Agency would code him as being AWOL.

In the evening of March 2, 2023, CAPT emailed Complainant that he had not
been in contact with the Agency since January 2, 2023. CAPT stated the
                                       4                           2024003112

Agency had failed to reach Complainant for an update on his status. CAPT
informed Complainant that he was being coded as AWOL because he had
exhausted his leave. CAPT said that he would request local police conduct a
welfare check unless Complainant responded by the next day. In the morning
of March 3, 2023, local police from Complainant’s home of residence
conducted the welfare check. Complainant complained that he had not seen
the CAPT’s message because it was emailed the night before. Complainant
further alleged that the local police officers told him that CAPT had stated that
Complainant was “psychologically unstable.”

On March 27, 2023, April 13, 2023, and May 15, 2023, the Human Resources
Manager (HRM) sent letters to Complainant and his medical provider which
indicated that Complainant had a medical condition that might affect his ability
to safely perform his job. HRM requested clarifying medical information to
assess Complainant’s ability to perform his essential duties. HRM asked
Complainant to have his medical provider complete a requested medical
assessment within fourteen days.

On August 3, 2023, OWCP granted Complainant’s appeal of its denial of his
workers compensation claim, and OWCP accepted his workers compensation
claim for the traumatic injury that he sustained at work on November 17,
2022. As a result, Complainant’s AWOL was recoded to leave without pay
(LWOP).

On April 10, 2023, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against him. The Agency framed Complainant’s claims
as follows:

         1. The Agency is liable for subjecting Complainant to a hostile work
            environment based on sexual orientation (bisexual)2 when, as he
            alleged, on November 17, 2022, CO1 shouted at him, threatened
            him, struck him in the throat, and used homophobic slurs, and
            another co-worker repeated the homophobic slurs and laughed;
            and

2
  In Bostock v. Clayton Cty., the Supreme Court held that discrimination based
on sexual orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590
U.S. 644, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020); see also Macy v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120120821 (Apr. 20, 2012) (an allegation of discrimination based
on gender identity, change of sex, and/or transgender status states a claim of
sex discrimination under Title VII because discrimination on this basis is
inherently sex-based).
                                      5                           2024003112

         2. Whether, between November 17, 2022, and April 10, 2023, the
            Agency subjected Complainant to disparate treatment based on
            reprisal when, as he alleged, management denied him
            continuation of pay (COP) benefits, coded him as being absent
            without leave (AWOL), conducted a welfare check, and requested
            additional medical documentation.

At the conclusion of the initial investigation, the Agency provided Complainant
with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a
hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative
Judge (AJ). The Agency’s initial report of investigation included Complainant’s
sworn statement, as discussed above, and those of CAPT and HRM.

CAPT stated that following the incident, he reassigned CO2 from the control
room because he had allowed CO1’s presence when only CO2 and Complainant
were authorized to be there. CAPT further said that CO1 and CO2 were issued
letters reminding them to be professional to fellow staff. CAPT surmised that
Complainant was not issued a similar letter because he absented himself from
work. CAPT testified that the Threat Assessment Committee generated a
report which concluded that Complainant’s assault allegation could not be
substantiated. CAPT stated that he did remember homophobic slurs being
mentioned in the Threat Assessment Committee’s report.             He further
indicated that the Threat Assessment Committee’s report consisted of memos
submitted by the witnesses and notes taken by the officials regarding the
witnesses’ live testimony. CAPT stated that the Threat Assessment Committee
interviewed Complainant, CO1, CO2, LT1 and LT2. He could not recall whether
there were pictures taken after the incident. He said there were no cameras
in the Control Center, so there was no video available of the incident. CAPT
referred the investigator to Human Resources for documentation from the
Threat Assessment Committee. CAPT further explained that health and
welfare checks were conducted whenever staff did not come to work and had
not called in sick.

HRM stated that his subordinate employee who served as Acting HRM
convened the Threat Assessment Committee. HRM stated that he had no
involvement with the Threat Assessment Committee and that Acting HRM
possessed the documentation from the Threat Assessment Committee. HRM
denied knowing of Complainant’s EEO activity until September 2023, after the
incidents he alleged to be retaliatory had occurred.      HRM stated that
Complainant was denied COP pay because OWCP initially denied his workers
compensation claim.
                                       6                          2024003112

HRM stated that Office of Personnel Management (OPM) rules compelled the
Agency to code Complainant as AWOL because he remained absent and had
no available leave to cover his absence.   Furthermore, HRM stated that
although Complainant was coded AWOL, his absence was ultimately recoded
to LWOP such that Complainant was never actually charged for being AWOL.
HRM stated that the welfare check was standard procedure and that
Complainant, rather than being harassed by the local police welfare check,
thanked the Agency for checking on him. HRM explained that he had
requested medical information from Complainant and his provider because of
Complainant’s continued absence and non-responsiveness to communications
with the Agency.

In a supplemental report of investigation, the Agency included statements
from CO1, CO2, LT1 and LT2.

CO1 admitted that he was in Control Room on November 17, 2022, and not
at his assigned post in the Front Lobby but stated he was there to legitimately
discuss appropriate matters with CO2. CO1 stated that he was merely joking
with Complainant about "throwing him under the bus" by letting the relief
lieutenant into the Front Lobby without giving him warning. CO1 denied
knowledge of Complainant’s sexual orientation. CO1 denied saying "queer,
fucking faggot, fucking homo, or gay motherfucker" to Complainant. CO1
claimed that he did not make threatening statements against Complainant.
When LT1 interviewed him about what transpired on November 17, 2022, he
counter-accused Complainant of being the aggressor by barking orders to
leave the Control Room and pointing in CO1’s face and chest area. CO1
memorialized his account of the incident in a contemporaneous memorandum
to LT1.

CO2 claimed that he was unaware of Complainant’s sexual orientation. CO2
said he had been in the restroom and heard Complainant and CO1 yelling on
November 17, 2022. He said that by the time he returned to the Control
Room, the yelling between CO1 and Complainant had stopped. CO2 denied
hearing that CO1 used anti-LGBTQ+ slurs or that he witnessed CO1 hit
Complainant in the neck. CO2 disputed that he told Complainant that he did
not want to get involved or indicated that he planned to write a false statement
saying that he did not see anything.

LT1 denied knowledge of Complainant’s sexual orientation. LT1 stated that
he had instructed CO1 to report to his office after Complainant had reported
that CO1 was refusing to leave the Control Room. LT1 stated Complainant
called back and accused CO1 of striking him.
                                     7                          2024003112

LT1 then questioned CO1 in the Front Lobby. LT1 stated that Complainant did
not report to him that CO1 had made anti-LGBTQ+ comments. LT1 directed
CO1 to document his version of events in a memo.

LT2 said that Complainant had called LT1 to report CO1 for not leaving the
Control Room. LT2 said he answered the call when Complainant called back
to report that he had been struck in the throat by CO1. LT2 said he found CO1
away from his post and instructed him to return to the Front Lobby. LT2
stated that he went to the Control Room where Complainant again told him
about CO1 hitting him in the throat. LT2 stated that he observed some
redness on Complainant’s neck area and that LT2 took pictures as a result.
LT2 denied that Complainant had said anything about being called anti-
LGBTQ+ terms. According to LT2, Complainant had only said that he and CO1
had a verbal confrontation that became physical over Complainant asking CO1
to leave the Control Room. LT2 denied knowing Complainant’s sexual
orientation.

In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final Agency
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). Regarding Claim 1, the Agency
held that because Complainant did not initially report the anti-LGBTQ+
comments prior to his EEO Counselor contact, evidence was insufficient to
establish that the harassment was based on Complainant’s sexual orientation.
Regarding Claim 2, the Agency determined that Complainant failed to
establish retaliatory animus. The final Agency decision concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination
as alleged.

                         CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, through Counsel, Complainant contested every fact of the final
Agency decision. For example, Complainant contends that the Agency’s final
decision repeatedly and improperly refuted the findings that Complainant was
assaulted by CO1 despite OWCP’s acceptance of Complainant’s workers
compensation claim. Counsel maintained that Complainant had proved that
he was assaulted and therefore, CO1 and CO2 were not credible in their
denials of verbally harassing Complainant with anti-LGBTQ+ slurs. Moreover,
it was argued that Complainant’s medical providers who supported his OWCP
claim wrote letters that confirmed Complainant’s allegations of being
subjected to anti-LGBTQ+ slurs. Complainant’s Counsel also argues that the
Agency engaged in unlawful suppression of evidence by refusing to provide
the EEO Investigator with a copy of the Threat Assessment Committee report.
                                      8                           2024003112

Meanwhile, Agency witnesses had testified as to the conclusions of the Threat
Assessment Committee and what information witnesses furnished thereto.
Counsel states that the Agency’s withholding of the Threat Assessment
Committee evidence deprived Complainant of the opportunity for meaningful
rebuttal of the statements that contradicted his claim. Additionally, Counsel
for Complainant asserted that the welfare check was retaliatory harassment
because Complainant was emailed a request to contact the Agency in the
evening and, before he knew of the Agency’s email, CAPT called local police
to make a welfare check on Complainant the following morning. In support
of Complainant’s retaliatory harassment claim, Counsel challenged HRM’s
January 2024 letter that scheduled Complainant for a fitness-for-duty
examination in Freemont, California, which was a seven-hour drive away from
Complainant’s home in Southern California. Additionally, Counsel accuses the
Agency of violating Complainant’s due process rights by failing to include a
notice of right to request a hearing with the supplemental report of
investigation. Counsel further explains that the Agency provided notice of
right to request a hearing with the original Report of Investigation on October
6, 2023. Complainant requested a FAD on October 25, 2023. On December
22, 2023, the Agency issued its supplemental report of investigation. Nothing
in the record indicated that the supplemental report of investigation was
accompanied by a second notice of right to request a hearing.

In its opposition to Complainant’s appeal, the Agency argues that Complainant
did not prove that he was subjected anti-LGBTQ+ discrimination. The Agency
stated that the witnesses did not recall Complainant mentioning anti-LGBTQ+
slurs in his report of CO1’s assault on him. The Agency asserts that the record
showed that CO1 was motivated by anger with Complainant over a work-
related matter (failing to warn CO1 about the relief lieutenant at his vacant
post). The Agency noted that CO1, CO2, LT1 and LT2 denied knowledge of
Complainant’s LGBTQ+ status prior to being interviewed by the EEO
Investigator. Regarding Claim 2, the Agency contends that it had provided
legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for all of the incidents alleged to be
retaliatory. The Agency denies violation of Complainant’s due process rights
in issuing the supplemental report of investigation and stated that no caselaw
supported Complainant’s position.

                           STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).            See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
                                       9                          2024003112

§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS

The Commission finds that the investigation and supplemental investigation
were inadequate and that the record lacks the thoroughness required for the
fact-finder to address the ultimate issue of whether discrimination occurred.
EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires, that the Agency develop
an impartial and appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on
the claims raised in the complaint. One purpose of an investigation is to gather
facts upon which a reasonable fact finder may draw conclusions as to whether
a violation of the discrimination statutes has occurred. Id.; EEO MD-110, at
Ch. 6, § IV.B. An investigation must include “a thorough review of the
circumstances under which the alleged discrimination occurred; the treatment
of members of the Complainant's group as compared with the treatment of
similarly situated employees...and any policies and/or practices that may
constitute or appear to constitute discrimination, even though they have not
been expressly cited by the complainant.” Id. at § IV.C. Also, an investigator
must identify and obtain “all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of
how it may affect the outcome.” Id. at §VI.D.

To establish a prima facie case of harassment, Complainant must prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence: (1) that he is a member of a statutorily
protected class; (2) that he was subjected to unwelcome conduct related to
his protected class; (3) that the harassment complained of was based on his
protected class; (4) that the harassment had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with his work performance and/or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) that there is a
basis for imputing liability to the employer. Celine B. v. Dep't of Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 2019001961 (Sept. 21, 2020).

To prove his harassment claim, Complainant must establish that he was
subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a
“reasonable person” in Complainant's position would have found the conduct
to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was
taken because of a protected basis; in this case, his sexual orientation.
                                      10                          2024003112

Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements -- hostility and motive
-- will the question of Agency liability present itself.

The record establishes that OWCP found that Complainant was injured from
being assaulted at work. Key to the proof of Complainant’s position that CO1
and CO2 acted out of anti-LGBTQ+ motive is whether Complainant reported
the anti-LGBTQ+ slurs to the Threat Assessment Committee that was
convened immediately after the November 17, 2022, assault. If the Threat
Assessment Committee evidence shows that Complainant did report to the
Threat Assessment Committee that CO1 called him such things as “queer” and
“fucking faggot,” then this would indicate that anti-LGBTQ+ animus factored
into the incidents described in Claim 1. On the other hand, the Threat
Assessment Committee documentation may show that Complainant described
the assault as motivated only by his not warning CO1 about the relief
lieutenant arriving at CO1’s Front Lobby post. In its current state, the record
is insufficiently developed to determine what, if anything, Complainant
reported about the anti-LGBTQ+ comments to the Threat Assessment
Committee.

Here, as Counsel for Complainant argued on appeal, neither the original report
of investigation nor the supplementary one contained critically relevant
evidence from the Threat Assessment Committee.                 According to
contemporaneous emails, the EEO Investigator twice requested the Threat
Assessment Committee documentation from Acting HRM. Instead of the
Threat Assessment Committee documentation, the supplemental report of
Investigation contains an email from Acting HRM denying the EEO Investigator
access to the Threat Assessment Committee documentation. Therein, Acting
HRM stated: “The case has been referred and per the guidance I received
from the HRM I am not allowed to [provide the Threat Assessment Committee
documentation].” Apparently, the matter was referred to the Agency’s Office
of Internal Affairs (OIA). Yet when the EEO Investigator twice requested OIA
reports concerning the verbal and physical assault on Complainant, the
Agency’s EEO Compliance Officer responded as follows:

            The Bureau's Office of Internal Affairs OIA has again
            reported that the case is open; therefore, no report is
            available as described in your request.

To determine whether discrimination occurred, the record requires further
development. The Agency should have reissued the notice of right to request
a hearing when it furnished Complainant the supplemental report of
investigation in December 2023.
                                      11                          2024003112

Accordingly, we will remand this matter to the Agency to conduct a
supplemental investigation and to provide notice of right to request a hearing
in accordance with the Order below. To avoid fragmentation of Complainant's
EEO complaint, we decline to address Claim 2) (Complainant’s reprisal claim)
at this stage.

                                CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we
REMAND this matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation into the
documentation that the Agency developed a result of Complainant’s allegation
that he was assaulted on November 17, 2022, in accordance with the ORDER
below.

                      ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD

Within 90 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a
supplemental investigation, to include the following actions:

      1. Conduct and complete a supplemental investigation consistent with
         the requirements of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b), in EEO MD-110,
         Chapter 6 and consistent with this decision. The supplemental
         investigation shall include, but is not limited to, documentation
         developed from the Threat Assessment Committee that was
         convened as a result of Complainant’s allegation that he was
         assaulted on November 17, 2022, as well as documentation resulting
         from the Agency’s Office of Internal Affairs (OIA) case concerning the
         same matter.

      2. The Agency shall also offer Complainant an opportunity to submit a
         rebuttal to the additional documentation obtained during the
         supplemental investigation.

Upon completion of the supplemental investigation, the Agency must provide
Complainant with a copy of the supplemental record and findings and shall
notify Complainant of the appropriate rights including the right to request a
hearing. If Complainant requests a final decision without a hearing, the
Agency shall issue a final decision within thirty (30) days of receipt of
Complainant's request, including appeal rights.
                                       12                           2024003112

       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION'S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the
Commission's corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days
of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital
format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket
number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is
complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the
digital format required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The
Agency's final report must contain supporting documentation when previously
not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission's order, the Complainant
may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce
compliance with the Commission's order prior to or following an administrative
petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action
on the underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled
“Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil
action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject
to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If
the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of
the complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be
terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of
the orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in
the referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                        RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
                                       13                          2024003112

      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f)
                                       14                           2024003112

          COMPLAINANT'S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0610)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative
processing of your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you
have the right to file such action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred
and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with
the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official
Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full
name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not
the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action
will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 29, 2024
Date
