             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Stanton S., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs
                               (Veterans Health Administration),
                                           Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2023002828

                             Agency No. 200H-0646-2020103675

                                          DECISION

On April 12, 2023, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
March 13, 2023, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission MODIFIES the Agency’s final decision.

                                    ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s award of pecuniary compensatory damages and non-pecuniary
compensatory damages was adequate to compensate Complainant for the discrimination he
suffered.

                                       BACKGROUND

Prior to the events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Plumber at the
Agency’s Oakland Medical Center (University Drive) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In 2015,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that he was subjected to a hostile work
environment due to his race, disability, and reprisal for prior protected activity.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2023002828

The Commission found that Complainant established that he was subjected to race-based
harassment and ordered, among other things, that the Agency reassign Complainant to a Plumber
position or a substantially equivalent position at the Heinz Campus VA Medical Center and
noting that Complainant could not be reassigned to work at the University Drive facility or with
any of his former co-workers again. See Stanton S. v. Dep’t of Vet. Aff., EEOC Appeal No.
0120170582 (Apr. 16, 2019).

Pursuant to the Commission’s order in that appeal, Complainant was offered and accepted a
position as a Plumber at the Agency’s Heinz Campus VA Medical Center in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, where he started on July 22, 2019.

On June 19, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against him on the basis of reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, inter alia, his
supervisor subjected him to harassment which included the Supervisor mocking Complainant
about his pay being withheld and directing co-workers to file Reports of Contact about him. On
appeal, the Commission found that Complainant established that he was subjected to retaliatory
harassment by his supervisor for which the Agency was liable. See Stanton S. v. Dep’t of Vet.
Aff., EEOC Appeal No. 2022001199 (Oct. 11, 2022). The Commission ordered the Agency to
conduct a supplemental investigation as to Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages,
restore any leave Complainant took because of the harassment and compensate Complainant for
any Leave Without Pay taken as a result of the harassment.

Pursuant to the Commission’s order, the Agency conducted a supplemental investigation into
Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages. Complainant requested pecuniary
compensatory damages in the total amount of $8,325.00 for past and future medical expenses
and an additional $300,000.00 in non-pecuniary compensatory damages for the emotional harm
and lasting psychological consequences of the harassment he suffered. In support of his claim,
he submitted an affidavit attesting to the severe psychological distress the Agency’s harassment
took on him, worsening his PTSD and anxiety, as well as a statement from his counselor which
further confirmed that prior to the Agency’s harassment, Complainant’s mental condition had
been significantly improved but that after the Agency’s harassment, Complainant’s condition
grew significantly worse and noting that Complainant was likely to require therapy for the rest of
his life as a result. Complainant also submitted a copy of his medical records and an invoice of
his past payments for therapy as well as an invoice showing projected therapy costs for 2023.

Thereafter, the Agency issued a final decision on Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory
damages. The Agency accepted Complainant’s claim for past pecuniary damages for the cost of
his therapy incurred as a result of the Agency’s discrimination and awarded the full requested
amount of $1,125.00 in past pecuniary losses as well as awarding $7,200.00 in future pecuniary
damages for the full projected cost of his therapy in 2023.
                                                3                                     2023002828

The Agency found that Complainant’s affidavit, as corroborated by the note from his counselor,
established that Complainant’s mental health condition was significantly worsened by the
Agency’s harassment resulting in exacerbation of his PTSD and anxiety, suicidal ideation, panic
attacks, nightmares, poor sleep and appetite, poor hygiene, loss of self-esteem, and caused lasting
harm to his relationships with his family and friends. The Agency noted, however, that the
evidence also indicated that some of Complainant’s symptoms were also due to grief at the death
of several family members who passed away in 2022. The Agency found that considering the
nature of the harassment suffered and the severity and duration of the harm incurred,
Complainant was entitled to an award of $175,000.00 in non-pecuniary compensatory damages.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant appealed. On appeal, Complainant argues that the Agency erred in awarding only a
single year of future medical expenses when Complainant’s counselor stated that Complainant
would require counseling for the rest of his life, contending that Complainant should therefore
receive an award of future medical expenses for his remaining life expectancy of 17 years
according to the U.S. Social Security Administration’s Period Life Table, amounting to a total of
$122,400.00, less the $7,200.00 the Agency has already paid. In addition, Complainant contends
that the award of non-pecuniary compensatory damages was inadequate to fully compensate
Complainant for the extent, severity, and duration of the harm he suffered and he should be
awarded the statutory maximum of $300,000.00. In the alternative, Complainant argues that
even if the award of non-pecuniary compensatory damages is not increased, the Agency erred in
not increasing the award to reflect present-day value. 2

The Agency did not file a brief in response.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).


2
 In addition, Complainant asks that the Agency be sanctioned for its delay in not completing the
supplemental investigation or issuing its decision on compensatory damages in a timely manner
as required by the Commission’s order in Appeal No. 2022001199. We decline to address
Complainant’s request for sanctions as it is unclear what sanctions Complainant seeks or would
be appropriate at this stage. We do, however, remind the Agency that it is required to comply
with the Commission’s orders in the stated time frame specified in its order.
                                                 4                                     2023002828

                                           ANALYSIS

Pecuniary Compensatory Damages

When discrimination is found, an agency must provide the complainant with a remedy that
constitutes full, make-whole relief to restore him as nearly as possible to the position he would
have occupied absent the discrimination. See, e.g., Franks v. Bowman Transp. Co., 424 U.S. 747,
764 (1976); Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 418-19 (1975); Adesanya v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01933395 (July 21, 1994). Pursuant to section 102(a) of the
Civil Rights Act of 1991, a complainant who establishes unlawful intentional discrimination
under Title VII and the Rehabilitation Act may receive compensatory damages for past and
future pecuniary losses (i.e., out-of-pocket expenses) and nonpecuniary losses (e.g., pain and
suffering, mental anguish) as part of make-whole relief. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(3). Compensatory
damages do not include back pay, interest on back pay, or any other type of equitable relief. 42
U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(2). In West v. Gibson, 527 U.S. 212 (1999), the Supreme Court held that
Congress afforded the Commission the authority to award compensatory damages in the
administrative process.

Pecuniary losses are out-of-pocket expenses incurred because of the agency's unlawful action,
including job-hunting expenses, moving expenses, medical expenses, psychiatric expenses,
physical therapy expenses, and other quantifiable out-of-pocket expenses. Past pecuniary losses
are losses incurred prior to the resolution of a complaint through a finding of discrimination, or a
voluntary settlement. EEO MD-110, at Chap. 11, VII.B.2 (internal citations omitted). Future
pecuniary damages are losses likely to occur after the resolution of the complaint. While past
pecuniary losses are not included in the $300,000.00 statutory cap, future pecuniary losses are
subject to the statutory cap. See Howen v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No.
01A42618 (Dec. 13, 2004).

In a claim for pecuniary, compensatory damages, a complainant must demonstrate, through
appropriate evidence and documentation, the harm suffered because of the agency’s
discriminatory action. See Sheila O. v. Dep’t of Health and Human Srvcs., EEOC Appeal No.
2021001250 (June 7, 2022). Objective evidence in support of a claim for pecuniary damages
includes documentation showing actual out-of-pocket expenses with an explanation of the
expenditure. The agency is only responsible for those damages that are clearly shown to be
caused by the Agency’s discriminatory conduct. To recover damages, a complainant must prove
that the employer's discriminatory actions were the cause of the pecuniary loss. Id. (citations
omitted).

Complainant contends that the Agency erred in only awarding one year of future pecuniary
damages for the cost of his therapy when his counselor stated that Complainant would require
therapy for the rest of his life. Complainant argued that he should be awarded the awarded
amount for his future therapy for the remainder of his life, estimating his life expectancy to be 17
years.
                                                 5                                      2023002828

We reject Complainant’s argument. While we acknowledge that Complainant’s counselor stated
that Complainant would likely require counseling for the remainder of his life, we find that the
evidence offered, a single invoice of the predicted costs of his therapy in 2023 is too speculative
and imprecise to support his entitlement to that same amount for the remainder of his life. We
note, for example, that the invoice does not take into account any projected improvement in
Complainant’s mental condition which would result in fewer counseling appointments, nor does
it consider the likely change in the cost of counseling in future years. Under the circumstances,
we do not find that the evidence is sufficient to support his request for additional future
pecuniary damages. See Tien E. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 2020001343 (July 15,
2021). We note, however, that the cost of Complainant’s future medical expenses will be
considered in his award of non-pecuniary compensatory damages in light of the expected
duration of his need for counseling.

Non-pecuniary Compensatory Damages

Nonpecuniary losses are losses that are not subject to precise quantification, i.e., emotional pain,
suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional
standing, injury to character and reputation, injury to credit standing, and loss of health. See
EEOC Notice No. 915.302, Enforcement Guidance on Compensatory and Punitive Damages
Available Under Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, at 10 (July 14, 1992). There is no
precise formula for determining the amount of damages for non-pecuniary losses except that the
award should reflect the nature and severity of the harm and the duration or expected duration of
the harm. See Loving v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29, 1997).
The Commission notes that non-pecuniary compensatory damages are designed to remedy the
harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than punish the agency for the discriminatory
action. Furthermore, compensatory damages should not be motivated by passion or prejudice or
“monstrously excessive” standing alone but should be consistent with the amounts awarded in
similar cases. See Ward-Jenkins v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01961483 (Mar. 4,
1999).

Evidence from a health care provider or other expert is not a mandatory prerequisite for recovery
of compensatory damages for emotional harm. See Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 01952288 (Apr. 18, 1996) (citing Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No.
01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993)). Objective evidence of compensatory damages can include statements
from a complainant concerning his emotional pain or suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish,
loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to character or reputation, injury
to credit standing, loss of health, and any other non-pecuniary losses that are incurred as a result
of the discriminatory conduct. Id.

Statements from others including family members, friends, health care providers, and other
counselors (including clergy) could address the outward manifestations or physical consequences
of emotional distress, including sleeplessness, anxiety, stress, depression, marital strain,
humiliation, emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, or a nervous breakdown.
Id.
                                                6                                     2023002828

Complainant’s own testimony, along with the circumstances of a particular case, can suffice to
sustain his burden in this regard. Id. The more inherently degrading or humiliating the
defendant's action is, the more reasonable it is to infer that a person would suffer humiliation or
distress from that action. Id. The absence of supporting evidence, however, may affect the
amount of damages appropriate in specific cases. Id.

Complainant has the burden of proving the existence, nature and severity of the alleged
emotional harm. Man H. v. Dep’t. of Homeland Sec’y, EEOC Appeal No. 0120161218 (May 2,
2017). Complainant must also establish a causal relationship between the alleged harm and the
discrimination. Id. Absent such proof of harm and causation, a complainant is not entitled to
compensatory damages, even if there were a finding of unlawful discrimination. Id.; Wilda M. v.
U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 0120141087 (Jan. 12, 2017) (awards for emotional harm
are warranted only if complainant establishes a sufficient causal connection between the
agency’s illegal actions and her injury).

Complainant contends that the Agency’s award of $175,000 is insufficient in light of the severity
of the harm he suffered and its extent and duration. In his affidavit, Complainant testified that
when he started working at the Heinz Campus Medical Center, he was hopeful because his
PTSD, anxiety, and depression had improved to the point where he could once again work, but
then the harassment he suffered in his new job caused him to suffer increased anxiety and
depression, panic attacks, flashbacks, and nightmares which caused him to have difficulty
sleeping. He asserted that it got so bad that at one point, he simply started crying while walking
down the hallway at work. He stated that his increased irritability and lack of patience resulted
in his withdrawing from his family, so he no longer spends any leisure time with them. In
addition, he spoke about his loss of future earning capacity because he is no longer able to work
due to his condition and asserted that the Agency’s harassment has ruined his life.
Complainant’s counselor corroborated that the harassment, including being ostracized and
intimidated by his co-workers and supervisors had a markedly negative impact on Complainant’s
mental health, resulting in a significant exacerbation of his PTSD, anxiety and depression,
manifested in night terrors, flashbacks, significant isolation from family and friends, and
catastrophic thinking. Complainant’s counselor noted that Complainant will require continued
psychotherapy and medication for his mental health for the rest of his life. His counselor also
noted that Complainant has suffered from an increase in hypertension and migraine headaches.
The counselor further stated that Complainant has mentioned suicidal thoughts, feeling like a
“failure,” a loss of enjoyment of life, and isolation from his family and friends.

We agree with Complainant that the Agency’s award was not sufficient to adequately
compensate Complainant and find that an award of $250,000 is more appropriate. We find that
an award of $250,000 takes into account not only the severity of the emotional harm
Complainant suffered but also the duration, which by Complainant’s counselor’s statement may
last for the rest of Complainant’s life.
                                                 7                                     2023002828

We also note that Complainant’s doctors have restricted him from returning to work at any VA
facility and therefore, Complainant has essentially been rendered unemployable by the Agency
and possibly by other employers as well due to his ongoing and continued mental health issues. 3
To the extent the Agency found the award of compensatory damages should be reduced because
some of Complainant’s symptoms were due to his grief over the loss of several family members
in 2022, the Agency’s finding is not supported by the evidence in the record. We emphasize that
Complainant’s counselor did not attribute any of Complainant’s symptoms to his grief and we
also note that the family members passed in 2022, two years after the Agency’s harassment and
there is no indication in the record that Complainant’s symptoms noticeably altered after the
losses occurred. We do not find that the record indicates that any other factors contributed in any
meaningful way to Complainant’s emotional state.

Given the nature, severity and duration of the harm suffered by Complainant, we find that an
award of $250,000 is not monstrously excessive, is not the product of passion or prejudice, and is
consistent with the amount awarded in similar cases. See Miquel G. v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC
Appeal No. 2019002129 (Sept. 23, 2021) (increasing an AJ’s award of compensatory damages to
$300,000 where the complainant suffered severe health problems that have rendered him unable
to work, insomnia, anxiety, isolation from his family, loss of enjoyment of life due to the
Agency’s discriminatory non-selection and retaliatory harassment); Geraldine B. v. Dep’t of
Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0720180025 (June 5, 2019) (upheld AJ award of $250,000 where
discrimination caused, the employee to suffer a severe setback in her mental and emotional
health and major depression, reputational damage, exacerbation of PTSD); Augustine S. v. Dep’t
of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0720110018 (October 22, 2015) (affirming an AJ’s
award of $250,000 where the agency’s failure to accommodate the complainant’s disabilities and
subjecting him to harassment caused severe physical and emotional harm that rendered him
unable to work, depression, sleep disturbances, and isolation from others).

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we MODIFY the Agency’s final decision on compensatory
damages.

                                        ORDER (D0617)

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial action:

       I.      To the extent it has not already done so, within 60 days of the date this decision is
               issued, the Agency will pay Complainant $8,325.00 in pecuniary compensatory
               damages.

3
  To the extent the Agency reduced the award in light of the mentions in Complainant’s medical
record of Complainant’s worries over his lack of employability, we emphasize that
Complainant’s employability is a direct consequence of the Agency’s harassment and therefore,
was not a valid reason to reduce his award.
                                                 8                                     2023002828

       II.     To the extent it has not already done so, within 60 days of the date this decision is
               issued, the Agency will pay Complainant $250,000.00 in nonpecuniary,
               compensatory damages. If the Agency has already paid Complainant its initial
               award of $175,000.000, the Agency will pay Complainant an additional
               $75,000.00 in nonpecuniary, compensatory damages.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include evidence that the corrective action has been implemented.

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H0124)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), they are entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and their representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.
                                                9                                     2023002828

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                               RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request.
                                               10                                    2023002828

Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0124)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full
name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 21, 2024
Date
