             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                         Jay C., 1
                                       Complainant,

                                             v.

                                 Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                        Secretary,
                             Department of Homeland Security
                             (Customs and Border Protection),
                                         Agency.

                                Request No. 2023003857
                                 Appeal No. 2022000822
                              Hearing No. 451-2017-00059X
                             Agency No. HS-CBP-00075-2016

                  DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

The Agency requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in Jay C. v. Department of Homeland Security, EEOC
Appeal No. 2022000822 (May 24, 2023). For the following reasons, the Commission DENIES
the Agency’s request.

                                   ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s request for reconsideration of EEOC Appeal No. 2022000822 meets the
criteria detailed in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

                                     BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Customs and
Border Patrol (CBP) Officer (Canine), GS-1895-12, at the Agency’s El Paso Field Office in El
Paso, Texas.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2023003857

On January 14, 2016, Complainant filed an equal employment opportunity complaint alleging, in
part, that the Agency discriminated against him based on race (Filipino/Pacific Islander) when,
on or around September 28, 2015, Complainant learned that he had not been selected to the CBP
Officer (Field Canine Enforcement Trainer) position, GS-1895-12, advertised under Job
Opportunity Announcement No. MHCROB-1371439-RF. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing. Before the AJ, Complainant filed
a Motion for Sanctions based on the Agency’s failure to maintain the following documents
related to his nonselection: (1) selection panel ratings of applicants’ resumes; (2) a list compiling
the selection panel data into a numerical list of scores; and (3) the application materials for
applicants other than Complainant and the two selected candidates. Complainant requested an
adverse inference as a sanction. The AJ denied the motion, finding that there was no evidence of
bad faith conduct by the Agency when it lost the documents related to Complainant’s
nonselection or that the lack of those documents would prejudice Complainant’s claim.

After the AJ denied the motion, the case was assigned to another AJ. Over Complainant’s
objection, the second AJ granted the Agency’s motion for a decision without a hearing and
issued a decision by summary judgment in favor of the Agency. When the Agency failed to
issue a final order within 40 days of receipt of the AJ’s decision, the AJ’s decision finding that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged became
the Agency’s final action pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(i). We note that the Agency
eventually issued a final order fully implementing the AJ’s decision. The instant appeal
followed. In our prior decision, we noted that Complainant’s appeal focused solely on his
nonselection, and we therefore addressed only those issues related to that claim on appeal.

We found that Complainant was included on the Certificate of Eligibles for the Field Canine
Enforcement Trainer position along with 17 other applicants. After the Certificate was issued, it
was sent to the Port of El Paso for evaluation. Port Director (PD) was the recommending
official, and Director of Field Operations was the selecting official (SO). Assistant Port Director
(APD) was responsible for reviewing the Certificate and convening a three-member panel to
review and score the applications for the listed applicants. After the panel rated the applicants,
APD created a packet for PD’s review, which consisted of the applications and the scoring
information from the panel members. APD did not provide any substantive feedback to PD on
the applications. Our prior decision noted that the record did not contain the identities of the
panel members, their scores for each applicant, notes they wrote during their reviews, or the
criteria they used to score each application. The record also failed to indicate whether or not the
panel members were aware of Complainant’s race.



2
  The complaint, after amendment, included six other claims and additional alleged bases of
discrimination. However, the prior appeal and the Agency’s request for reconsideration involve
only the nonselection claim.
                                                 3                                     2023003857

The record contained only the resumes, online application responses, and reference checks for
Complainant, the first selectee (Selectee), and the second selectee (Alternate), but not those of
the other applicants.

During the investigation, PD could not find the packet APD provided her, but she recalled that
the panel scored Selectee highest and Alternate second-highest, while Complainant’s score was
in the bottom half of the 18 total applicants on the Certificate of Eligibles. PD stated she did not
recall exactly how she made the selection for the vacancy at issue, but she stated her standard
procedure is to closely review the top-scoring applicants and only skim the lower-scoring
applicants. PD also stated that she was generally aware of the statistics for contraband seizures
of all the canine handlers because she reviewed that information each week, and therefore she
believed Selectee and Alternate were “go-getters” in that regard, while her impression of
Complainant was that he did not have a lot of seizures. Our prior decision noted that PD did not
pull specific seizure information at the time she was reviewing the applications. No interviews
were conducted for the position. PD sent SO a recommendation letter in which she
recommended that SO select Selectee and, if he declined, Alternate. Selectee had already
accepted another position at the time of the job offer, so Alternate was offered the position and
accepted it.

Our prior decision indicated that in her affidavit, PD, when asked why she did not recommend
Complainant for the position, averred that Complainant “was not the best qualified for this job
based off of his resume and reference checks” and that neither “his resume nor his reference
checks were as good as the selectee.” ROI at 124. When asked to identify the specific
knowledge, skills, and abilities that Selectee possessed to qualify him for the position and to
compare Selectee’s and Alternate’s experience and qualifications with Complainant’s, PD
merely stated “[Complainant] was not selected for this position because the documentation that
he submitted to apply for the position was not as good as the selectee.” Id.

In the prior decision, we found that the issuance of a decision without a hearing was appropriate
but that the AJ erred when she found in favor of the Agency rather than Complainant. We
concluded that the Agency failed to provide legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
Complainant’s nonselection. We first determined that Complainant established a prima facie
case of discrimination for his claim, which shifted the burden to the Agency of producing a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation for not selecting Complainant for the position at issue.
Though the AJ had concluded that the Agency’s rationale was that Selectee and Alternate had
the first- and second-highest panel scores, respectively, we found that insufficient to meet the
Agency’s burden. We found that PD—aside from her general impression of applicants’ seizure
numbers—“did not identify any specifics about the resumes and job performance of Selectee and
Alternate that made them the best qualified applicants and better qualified than Complainant.”
Appellate Decision at 8. Because the Agency could not produce the panelists’ scores for each
applicant, we further found that the Agency was essentially asking that we take PD’s word that
Complainant was in the bottom half of the applicants and that Selectee and Alternate had the top
scores.
                                                 4                                      2023003857

We therefore concluded that the record contained no clarification regarding the specific qualities
that made Selectee and Alternate better qualified than Complainant and that the Agency failed to
provide an individualized explanation for Complainant’s nonselection.

Because we found that the Agency did not provide a specific, clear, and individualized reason as
to why Complainant was not selected for the position, even though he was initially deemed
qualified, we found that the Agency failed to overcome Complainant’s prima facie case of race
discrimination. Therefore, our prior decision concluded that Complainant prevailed on his
nonselection claim without having to prove pretext.

We further found that the first AJ did not err in denying Complainant’s Motion for Sanctions
requesting an adverse inference. While we noted that the situation indicated a “clear
recordkeeping violation by the Agency,” we found that there was no evidence of bad faith or
otherwise contumacious conduct by the Agency to warrant sanctions. Appellate Decision at 9.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON REQUEST

In its request for reconsideration, the Agency argues that the prior decision was clearly erroneous
when it found that PD did not identify specific, individualized information as to why
Complainant was not selected over Selectee and Alternate. While the Agency concedes that it
was unable to locate most of the selection materials, including those compiled by the selection
panel, the Agency argues that PD’s testimony in her deposition and her sworn statements in her
affidavit indicated that she relied on the following: (1) the numerical scores of the applicants;
and (2) her review of seizure statistics of the top applicants and of Complainant. Citing to her
deposition, the Agency argues that, “at the time of her recommendation, [PD] reviewed the
seizure records of the selectees, finding that they had several ‘cold’ seizures, 3 and was aware that
the Complainant did not have any.” PD also noted that Complainant was not as highly rated in
terms of the panel scores. The Agency therefore argues that “[PD’s] recommendation to [SO]
was based on these facts, which are uncontested in the record” and that the Agency provided
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Even conceding that the panel scores and
other associated application materials are not in the record, the Agency contends that PD’s “clear
testimony” indicated that the reasons for Complainant’s nonselection “were based on clearly job-
related factors and had nothing to do with race.”

In the alternative of affirming its final order, the Agency contends that the lack of scoring
materials raises questions of fact that could be proper avenues for cross-examination and
impeachment of witnesses. Therefore, the Agency argues that such a lack of evidence would be
a matter for adjudication at hearing as opposed to a judgment in Complainant’s favor. We note
that the Agency does not specifically challenge any of the remedies we ordered on appeal.


3
  The record indicates that “cold” seizures refer to seizures made when the canine handler finds
contraband without any prior intelligence. That is, a cold seizure involves a situation in which
the CPB Officer had no indication before the canine’s search that there was likely to be
contraband present.
                                                 5                                     2023003857

Complainant opposes the Agency’s request for reconsideration and notes that the prior decision
contained a lengthy analysis of the evidence and found that the Agency’s reasons were legally
insufficient. Complainant argues that our prior finding is consistent with Commission precedent
and that the Agency’s conclusory statements about why Selectee and Alternate were more
qualified than Complainant are inadequate to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

                                           ANALYSIS

Based on our review of the record, we find that our prior decision was not clearly erroneous.

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
she was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of
a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas,
411 U.S. at 802 n. 13. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
253 (1981). Should the Agency carry its burden, Complainant must then prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination.
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v.
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993); Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.

The Agency does not dispute our prior decision’s conclusion that Complainant established a
prima facie case of race discrimination, and we find no clear error in this regard.

Once a complainant has established a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253. The
Supreme Court has described this burden as being met “if the [agency’s] evidence raises a
genuine issue of fact as to whether it discriminated against the [complainant],” and that “[t]o
accomplish this, the [agency] must clearly set forth, through the introduction of admissible
evidence, the reasons for the [complainant’s] rejection.” Id. at 254-55. Moreover, the agency
must “frame the factual issue with sufficient clarity so that the [complainant] will have a full and
fair opportunity to demonstrate pretext,” with the adequacy of its evidence “evaluated by the
extent to which it fulfill[ed] these functions.” Id. at 255-56.
                                                 6                                      2023003857

The burden incumbent upon the agency to respond to a complainant’s prima facie case with a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions is a burden of production, not persuasion.
Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142. While the agency’s burden of production is not onerous, it must
nevertheless provide a specific, clear, and individualized explanation for the treatment accorded
a complainant. Lorenzo v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Request No. 05950931 (Nov. 6, 1997); see
Woodward v. Dep’t of Labor, EEOC Appeal No. 01970288 (Feb. 1, 2000).

Upon review of the record, we find that the prior decision was not clearly erroneous in finding
that the Agency did not meet its burden of articulating a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
Complainant’s nonselection. PD’s affidavit statements, quoted earlier in this decision and in the
prior decision, were nonspecific and conclusory. PD simply stated that Complainant was not the
best qualified candidate and that the two applicants selected were better qualified than
Complainant based on their submitted application materials. Such statements are insufficient to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason. See, e.g., Elliot J. v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120161848 (Feb. 22, 2018) (finding the Agency failed to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason when the selecting official “only explained that she chose the three
selectees because she felt they were the most highly qualified candidates and would be the most
effective team leaders based on their ‘qualifications, leadership abilities, and interpersonal
skills[,]’ [and] that she did not feel . . . [c]omplainant was the most highly qualified candidate”).

The Agency’s citations to PD’s deposition testimony are also insufficient to establish clear error.
While PD stated her impression that Selectee and Alternate had more seizures than Complainant,
including cold seizures, her deposition makes clear that she did not pull the actual seizure records
of Complainant and the two selectees when reviewing resumes and making her recommendation.
When she was asked directly whether she had reviewed the seizure records for the applicants in
this case, PD responded “[N]o. I just got the seizure records recently to review those for my own
interest.” PD Deposition at 49. PD was then asked again, “[A]re you saying you didn’t review
the seizure records before making a recommendation for this position?” Id. She responded, “I
don’t believe I saw all of those, specifically, for the recommendation for this position.” Id.
Based on PD’s responses, we find no clear error in our prior determination that PD’s merely
general impression of the seizure records for Selectee, Alternate, and Complainant was
insufficient to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s nonselection.
While PD stated that she weekly reviewed the canine seizure records for all of her canine
handlers at the time of Complainant’s nonselection, the record does not clearly indicate that she
actually compared Complainant’s seizure records with those of the two selected candidates as
part of the selection process. We further note that PD did not mention her assessment of
Complainant’s seizure records in her affidavit submitted during the investigation. Therefore, we
find that PD’s testimony that Complainant’s seizure records were less impressive than those of
Selectee and Alternate is not enough to establish clear error in our prior decision.

The Agency also argues that, despite the lack of record evidence of the panelists’ scores, we have
PD’s sworn statements that Complainant ranked in the lower half of the listed applicants, while
Selectee and Alternate were the two highest-scoring candidates.
                                                7                                     2023003857

Therefore, the Agency argues, the applicants’ respective scores were a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s nonselection. Despite PD’s contention that
Complainant scored lower than Selectee and Alternate, the record fails to indicate on what
criteria these scores were based or how the panelists made their scoring decisions. The mere fact
of Complainant scoring lower than Selectee and Alternative, even if true, is therefore insufficient
to establish a clear, specific, individualized reason that meets the Agency’s burden of production.
See, e.g., Pamala L. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 2021001021 (Dec. 13, 2021)
(citing Myles v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0120092511 (Feb. 10, 2011) (agency
failed to meet burden of production when it merely said that complainant was not selected
because a review panel ranked him lower in scoring, because this was not a specific, clear, and
individualized explanation for complainant’s nonselection)).

We find the Agency failed to establish that our prior decision was clearly erroneous with regard
to material fact or law. The Agency did not meet its burden of articulating a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s nonselection with sufficient specificity such that
Complainant was unable to mount an evidentiary challenge to the Agency’s selection of Selectee
and Alternate. We therefore find our prior decision was not clearly erroneous in finding that
Complainant established that he was subjected to race discrimination when he was not selected
for the Field Canine Enforcement Trainer position at issue.

We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission.
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (Aug. 5, 2015),
at 9-18; see Lopez v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20, 2007). Rather,
a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a
clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the
policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. The Agency has not done so here.

                                         CONCLUSION

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2022000822 remains the
Commission’s decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request. The Agency shall comply with the Order as set forth herein.

                                             ORDER

The Agency is ORDERED to take the following remedial actions:

       1. Within 30 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall extend to
          Complainant a written offer for the position of CBP Officer (Field Canine
          Enforcement Trainer), GS-1895-12, or a substantially equivalent position.
          Complainant shall have 15 days, from the date of the offer, to accept or decline the
          position. If Complainant should decline the Agency’s offer, the date of his rejection
                                        8                                    2023003857

   shall be the end date for any back pay due Complainant. Failure to respond within 15
   days will be construed as rejection of the offer.

2. The Agency shall pay Complainant back pay, with interest, from the date on which it
   is determined Complainant would have started in the CBP Officer (Field Canine
   Enforcement Trainer) position. The Agency shall determine the appropriate amount
   of back pay, with interest, and other benefits due the Complainant, pursuant to 29
   C.F.R. § 1614.501, no later than 60 days after the date this decision is issued. The
   Agency shall also pay compensation for the adverse tax consequences of receiving
   back pay as a lump sum. Complainant has the burden of establishing the amount of
   increased tax liability, if any. After the Agency has calculated and paid
   Complainant’s back pay award, Complainant shall have 60 days following the end of
   the tax year in which the final payment is received to calculate the adverse tax
   consequences of any lump sum back pay awards, if any, and notify the Agency.
   Following receipt of Complainant’s calculations, the Agency shall have 60 days to
   issue Complainant a check compensating him for any adverse tax consequences
   established, with a written explanation for any amount claimed but not paid. The
   Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute.
   The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance
   Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled “Implementation of the
   Commission’s Decision.”

3. The Agency shall conduct and complete a supplemental investigation on the issue of
   Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages and will afford him an
   opportunity to establish a causal relationship between the Agency’s discriminatory
   action and his pecuniary or non-pecuniary losses, if any. Within 15 days of the date
   this decision is issued, the Agency shall give Complainant notice of his right to
   submit objective evidence (pursuant to the guidance given in Carle v. Dep’t of the
   Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993)) in support of his claim for
   compensatory damages. Complainant shall have 45 days from the date the
   Complainant receives the Agency’s notice to submit his compensatory damages
   evidence. Complainant has a duty to cooperate in determining compensatory
   damages, including providing evidence/input/documents (including responding to
   Agency requests for documentation or completing Agency forms). The Agency shall
   issue a final decision, with appeal rights to the Commission, on the issue of
   compensatory damages. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110. The Agency shall submit a copy of
   the final decision to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth herein. Within 30
   days of determining the amount of compensatory damages due Complainant, the
   Agency shall pay that amount to Complainant.

4. Within 90 days from the date the decision is issued, the Agency is directed to conduct
   eight hours of in-person or interactive training for SO and PD. The Agency shall
   address management’s responsibilities with respect to eliminating discrimination in
   the workplace.
                                                9                                     2023003857

       5. Within 60 days from the date the decision is issued, the Agency shall consider
          disciplining SO and PD. The Commission does not consider training to constitute
          disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the Compliance Officer.
          If the Agency decides not to issue any disciplinary action, it shall set forth the
          reason(s) for its decision. If any of the named management officials is no longer
          employed by the Agency, the Agency shall furnish proof of the date(s) of separation.

       6. Within 120 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall communicate, in
          writing, to managers and supervisors who participate in selections the requirement to
          retain panel notes/evaluations in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14, and the
          Agency shall include in EEO training given to managers and supervisors who
          participate in selections a provision to retain interview notes/evaluations in
          accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14.

       7. The Agency shall, within 30 days of the date this decision is issued, post a notice in
          accordance with the Order herein.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency’s calculation of back pay and
other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Port of El Paso facility copies of the attached notice. Copies
of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted
both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date
this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places,
including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take
reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other
material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in
the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days
of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format, and must be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY’S FEES (H0124)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), they are entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency.
                                                10                                    2023003857

The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (Q0124)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by his or her full name and official title.
                                               11                                    2023003857

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 28, 2024
Date
