           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Patrick H., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                          Isabel Casillas Guzman,
                                Administrator,
                        Small Business Administration,
                                   Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2023001260

                          Agency No. SBA 07-21-03

                                  DECISION

On December 20, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s December 12, 2022, final
decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the
following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                             ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the Agency properly determined that Complainant failed to meet his
burden in proving he was subject to discrimination on the basis of race and
national origin.




1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                           2023001260

                               BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Lender Relations Specialist (LRS), GS-12, in the Agency’s Connecticut
District Office, Boston regional Office, and Office of Field Operations for
fifteen years.

On August 16, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against him on the bases of race (Asian) and national
origin (China) when:

  1. On July 23, 2021, he was rated ineligible for the International Trade &
     Finance Specialist position at the GS-14 level;
  2. On July 28, 2021, his request for reconsideration was denied.

The evidence developed during the investigation revealed that Complainant
applied for the International Trade & Finance Specialist position on June 6,
2021, via USAJobs.gov. Complainant stated that he received notice on July
23, 2021, stating that he was ineligible for the position because he did not
possess the specialized experience requirement and, consequently, his name
was not referred to the selecting official for consideration.

Complainant stated that the vacancy announcement called for four
qualifications and the candidate needed to possess three of those
experiences in order to be eligible for the position. The vacancy
announcement indicated that, for the GS-14 position applied to, applicants
must show “One year of specialized experience; equivalent to the GS-13
grade level in the Federal Service, obtained in either the private or public
sector that includes three of the four specialized experiences:

  1. Working with international trade finance products (e.g., letter of credit
     or credit insurance) or export finance loans; or
  2. Underwriting small business loans or commercial loans (e.g.,
     commercial and industrial loans); or
  3. Underwriting and managing asset-based loans (ABL); or
  4. Serving as a loan officer or relationship/portfolio manager in a bank or
     financial institution in which you had the capacity to close loans on
     behalf of the organization.

A Human Resources Specialist (HRS) stated that she initially reviewed
candidates’ applications.
                                      3                          2023001260

She asserted this was a delegated examining announcement, which meant it
was open to the public. She reviewed applications in the best-qualified
category and pulled the names of those candidates and forwarded those
names to the subject matter experts after providing them a copy of the
specialized experience and advising them of what to look for in the
application to determine if the candidate met three of the four duties that
were listed in the specialized experience.

There were two subject matter experts (SME1 and SME2) involved in the
selection process who reviewed 60 candidates’ resumes, including
Complainant’s. SME1 stated that he found Complainant did not meet the
specialized performance criteria for three of the four criteria as outlined in
his resume. Specifically, SME1 found Complainant did not satisfy
qualification 2 (underwriting of commercial loans), qualification 3
(underwriting and managing asset-based loans), and qualification 4
(experience serving as a loan officer, relationship manager, portfolio
manager, to close loans on behalf of a bank or financial institution). SME1
stated that, while Complainant had experience working with a bank, it was
not referenced in his resume that he had specific underwriting experience for
commercial loans or asset-based loans or that he was a loan officer with the
ability to close loans on behalf of the bank. SME1 testified that the seven
candidates he referred all met the criteria as their resumes clearly indicated
they had the specialized experience required.

SME2 corroborated SME1’s testimony regarding the process of reviewing the
candidates. SME2 stated that the six candidates he rated as qualified and
referred for selection met the specialized experience required for the
position. SME2 testified that he determined Complainant did not meet any of
the four qualification criteria. He stated he did not find Complainant had any
expertise in underwriting and managing a bank or closing loans and he did
not find that Complainant’s resume indicated he had very much banking
credit training. SME2 provided detailed testimony on Complainant’s resume
and his assessment that Complainant had not shown he possessed the
necessary experience. SME2 testified that when looking at Complainant’s
description of the work and the context in which it was written, he did not
believe Complainant had the underwriting experience that he included in his
resume. Both SME1 and SME2 denied that Complainant’s race or national
origin were a factor in their evaluation of Complainant’s resume.

The HRS testified the subject matter experts completed their review of all
the applicants and returned their qualifications review to her, determining
Complainant did not meet the qualifications and was therefore ineligible.
                                      4                           2023001260

The HRS stated that she did not have any discussions with the subject
matter experts and only reviewed what they provided. She sent a list of
seven candidates names who were deemed eligible to the hiring official to
decide on interviews and selections. The hiring official made three selections.
All three selectees were identified as White.

Regarding Complainant’s application, the HRS stated that he applied at the
GS-14 level; however, his resume did not clearly articulate the specialized
experience requested for the position as he did not meet qualifications 2, 3,
or 4, and his resume did not support qualification 1. The HRS stated that the
Agency had been updating their specialized experience per position
announcement to raise the quality of the applicant pool, so if a candidate
was deemed eligible for a previous position does not mean they would
automatically be eligible for the current position.

Once he became aware of his nonreferral for selection he requested
reconsideration from a Supervisory Human Resources Specialist who upheld
the decision of the subject matter experts, relative to his non-referral
indicating she found that his resume did not specifically address the
requirements of qualification criteria 2, 3, or 4 of the desired position
description. The Supervisory HRS also found that his resume did not reflect
that he had performed underwriting at the GS-13 level and it did not indicate
he had closed loans for any organization.

The Supervisory HRS testified that when Complainant requested
reconsideration, she reviewed his resume and documents and agreed he was
not qualified for the position. The Supervisory HRS testified that
Complainant argued that he had a training certificate that would satisfy the
requirements, but she stated that it was not addressed within his resume
and therefore not part of his application to review. The Supervisory HRS
stated that after Complainant’s request for reconsideration was denied, he
continued to send additional documentation; however, documentation could
not be accepted after the closing of the vacancy nor could emails between
private parties be considered as qualifying documentation if they were not
included in the resume.

Complainant stated his name should have been referred because he met the
one year of specialized experience requirement. He testified that he is a GS-
12, and the opportunity was offered at the GS-13 level; however, he did not
apply for the GS-13 level. He maintained he had applied for similar positions
at the GS-14 level was always referred for selection consideration.
                                       5                          2023001260

Complainant stated that he is a GS-12 but did a GS-14 job based on the
exchange of emails from the Deputy Associate Administrator in charge of the
Office of International Trade. Complainant stated that he should have been
referred because: (1) he applied as an outside candidate as did the
Selectee; (2) the Selectee had no experience at the Agency; (3)
Complainant has at least GS-12, Step 8 experience; (4) he has experience
at the Agency and in the private sector; and (5) he was eligible for the
position in 2018. Complainant stated that all of his relevant experience was
included on his resume and should have satisfied the position requirements
to be qualified for the GS-14 position. Complainant believes that his
application was mistakenly disqualified.

Complainant testified that he indicated the required experiences on his
resume by using words like “underwriting,” “managed asset-based loans,”
“relationship manager,” “portfolio manager” and “loan officer” clearly in his
resume and provided supporting documentation in his application.
Complainant also stated that SME1 was aware of his qualifications, knew
that he applied for the position, and that he was deemed qualified for the
same position in 2020 at another location. Complainant stated the HRS who
initially reviewed and rated his qualifications, and the Supervisory HRS who
reviewed his resume in his request for reconsideration, were both aware of
his race and national origin.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request
a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the
Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In the decision, the Agency found that Complainant failed to establish a
prima facie case of race and national origin discrimination. The Agency also
found that there were legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions,
and that Complainant did not provide any persuasive evidence to support his
claim that the Human Resources staff and SMEs were motivated by his race
or national origin in finding him ineligible for the position and then upholding
the decision upon reconsideration. Ultimately, the decision concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination
as alleged.

The instant appeal followed.
                                     6                          2023001260

                         CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contends that he established a prima facie case of
discrimination because three candidates outside of Complainant’s protected
class were selected for the position. Complainant also contends that the
Agency’s reasons for rating Complainant ineligible for the position are
pretext for discrimination. More specifically, Complainant contends that he
made it clear in his cover letter and his resume that he possessed the four
specialized experience requirements and performed five specific key job
duties with ten supporting documents in his application. Complainant also
contends that both SMEs were fully aware of his race and national origin but
denied it in their testimonies.

On appeal, the Agency contends that its Final Agency Decision correctly
found that the Agency did not discriminate against Complainant on the basis
of his race or national origin. The Agency maintains that Complainant failed
to establish a prima facie case or show any nexus between his protected
classes and the complained of actions. The Agency argues that Complainant
cannot demonstrate that he was actually qualified for the position.

                          STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).            See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, Complainant must satisfy the
three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).
                                     7                          2023001260

First, he must generally establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances
that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v.
Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary
depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802 n. 13.

To establish a prima facie case of discrimination, Complainant must show
that: (1) he is a member of a protected class; (2) he suffered an adverse
employment action; and (3) either that similarly situated individuals outside
his protected class were treated differently, or other circumstances
surrounding the adverse employment action give rise to an inference of
discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13; Reeves v.
Sanderson Plumbing, 530 U.S. 133, 142 (2000); Bodett v. CoxCom, Inc.,
366 F.3d 736, 743-44 (9th Cir.2004) (internal quotation marks omitted).

It is undisputed that Complainant was a member of a protected class (race
and national origin) and that he suffered an adverse employment action
when he was not referred for the position and denied reconsideration. To
satisfy the third element of a prima facie case, Complainant argued that
some of the seven candidates who were rated eligible and referred for
interview were outside of his protected classes, and the three candidates
who were ultimately selected were White candidates outside of his race and
national origin. The record corroborates the selectees identified race. See
ROI at 325. We find these facts to support the establishment of a prima facie
case of discrimination on the basis of race. Since there is no identifying
information in the record regarding the referred candidates or selectees’
national origin presented in the investigative record compiled by the agency,
we will assume, for the purpose of our analysis, that Complainant has
established a prima facie case of discrimination on that basis.

Once a prima facie case is established, the burden then shifts to the Agency
to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas
Dep’t of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, Complainant needs to prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Agency’s explanation is pretext masking discrimination.
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 120 S.Ct. 2097
(2000); St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

In claim 1, Complainant alleged that he was discriminated against when he
was rated ineligible for the Specialist position at the GS-14 level.
                                       8                          2023001260

In response, SME1 testified that he found Complainant did not meet the
specialized performance criteria for qualifications 2, 3, and 4. ROI at 475.
SME1 stated that he did find that Complainant met the specialized criteria
for qualification 1 based on his experience with the Agency and also some of
his credentials that were referenced in his resume. Id. SME1 stated that
Complainant did not outline his experiences sufficiently to meet the other
qualifications. ROI at 476. SME2 also stated that he found Complainant did
not meet any of the specialized criteria needed for the position, specifically
underwriting experience. ROI at 497. SME2 stated that Complainant
mentioned underwriting three times in his resume, but the way it was
mentioned allowed SME2 to determine that Complainant did not truly have
underwriting experience or the other qualifications. ROI at 499. SME2 found
that Complainant did not have any banking credit training given SME2’s
specialized experience and knowledge of some of the companies and roles
that Complainant listed on his resume. Id.

SME1 stated that the three candidates who were ultimately selected met all
four of the required criteria. ROI at 476. SME1 stated that the selectees;
resumes were clearly outlined their qualifications, showed that they worked
in multiple banks and financial institutions where they were involved in
underwriting and commercial loans. ROI at 477. SME1 also stated that the
selectees all clearly indicated that they were loan officers that originated and
closed commercial loans for at least one year. Id.

In claim 2, Complainant alleged that he was discriminated against when his
reconsideration request was denied by the Supervisory HRS. In response,
the Supervisory HRS stated that Complainant’s request for reconsideration
was denied because his resume did not reflect that he had underwritten for
small business loans or commercial loans in the jobs that he mentioned. ROI
at 546. The Supervisory HRS states that Complainant’s resume did not
reflect that he had been responsible for closing loans on behalf of an
organization either. Id. The Supervisory HRS explained that while
Complainant may have felt that his experience should be known or should
have been considered based on the title of his position, it was not explicitly
written within his resume. Id. The Supervisory HRS ultimately determined
that she agreed with the SMEs and found that he was not eligible for the
position based on the resume he submitted. ROI at 549. The Supervisory
HRS also stated that each position announcement is different, so it is
possible that Complainant was deemed eligible in another posting and not
for the current one. ROI at 550.
                                     9                          2023001260

The Supervisory HRS stated that Complainant continued to send her
qualifying documentation, but since it was not originally included with the
resume, she did not review it. ROI at 550-551.

We find that the Agency proffered nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions
in both claims.

Since the Agency provided legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions, Complainant now bears the burden to prove pretext. Indicators of
pretext include, but are not limited to, discriminatory statements or past
personal treatment attributable to those responsible for the personnel action
that led to the filing of the complaint, comparative or statistical data
revealing differences in treatment across various protected-group lines,
unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard procedures
without    explanation     or   justification,  or   inadequately  explained
inconsistencies in the evidentiary record. Mellissa F. v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120141697 (Nov. 12, 2015). Pretext in this context may
also be found where the complainant's qualifications are plainly superior to
the qualifications of the selectee. See Wasser v. Dep't of Labor, EEOC
Request No. 05940058 (Nov. 2, 1995); Bauer v. Bailar, 647 F.2d 1037, 1048
(10th Cir. 1981). At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant
to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency's
reasons were not the real reasons, and that the Agency instead was
motivated by a prohibited reason.

In this case, Complainant argues that the Agency’s reasons for rating him
ineligible for the position are pretextual because he did in fact include
information that made it clear that he possessed the four specialized
experience requirements with 10 supporting documents in his application.
Complainant also argues that he is more qualified for the position than the
selectees and listed several experiences and the length of time he did each
one. The Commission has long held that an Agency has broad discretion to
set policies and carry out personnel decisions, such as position selections,
and it should not be second-guessed by the reviewing authority absent
evidence of unlawful motivation. See Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 259 (1981); Vanek v. Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC
Request No. 05940906 (Jan. 16, 1997). In this case, there is no evidence of
unlawful motivation for the Agency’s actions in claim 1. Additionally, an
employer has greater discretion when filling management level or specialized
positions, such as the International Trade & Finance Specialist position in
this case. Wrenn v. Gould, 808 F.2d 493, 502 (6th Cir. 1987).
                                     10                         2023001260

Complainant also argues that both of the SMEs were biased against him
because they knew his race and national origin. However, SME2 testified
that they did not know Complainant’s race or national origin. See ROI at 530
and 551. Complainant does not otherwise present any convincing arguments
or evidence to establish that the SMEs were aware of his protected
categories or considered those protected categories when making their
decisions. Bare assertions, such as Complainant’s, are insufficient to prove
pretext. See Erby v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120064377 (Feb.
12, 2008).

In claim 2, Complainant argues that the Supervisory HRS failed to follow the
Agency’s Reconsideration Procedure and Guidelines and review his additional
supporting documents, including his cover letter. However, a review of the
Agency guidelines on reconsideration reveals no specific provision making it
necessary to consider information beyond the applicant’s resume. See ROI
at 345. Additionally, employers are entitled to make their own business
judgments and the reasonableness of the employer’s decision may be
probative of whether it is pretext. However, the focus is on the employer’s
motivation, not its business judgment. See Matilda C. v. EEOC, EEOC Appeal
No. 0720140027 (Jul. 31, 2018); Eric M. v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120162148 (Feb. 13, 2018); Glass v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 07A50068 (Jun. 15, 2006). So, while Complainant might believe
that the Agency should have considered his additional documentation,
without any evidence that his race or national origin was a factor in the
Supervisory HRS’ decision to exclude the documentation or ultimately deny
his request for reconsideration, this argument cannot by itself support a
finding of discrimination.

Beyond these assertions, Complainant does not provide any arguments or
record evidence to suggest that his race or national origin was considered in
the Agency’s action in claim 2. A review of the record does not otherwise
reveal any evidence of unlawful motivation.

Accordingly, we find that Complainant has not established that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination on the basis of race and national origin.

                               CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision finding no discrimination.
                                      11                          2023001260

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g).
                                       12                          2023001260

Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also
include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their
request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).


          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests.
                                       13                          2023001260

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 12, 2024
Date
