              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                          Edmond C., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                        Frank Kendall,
                                          Secretary,
                                  Department of the Air Force,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022003336

                        Hearing Nos. 410202000168X, 410202000557X

                          Agency Nos. 9R1M1900087, 9R1M2000209

                                           DECISION

Complainant timely appealed to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC” or
“Commission”), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403, from the Agency’s May 9, 2022 Final Order
concerning an equal employment opportunity (“EEO”) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (“Title VII”), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission MODIFIES the Agency’s
Final Order.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether Complainant established, by preponderance of the evidence, that he was subjected to
discrimination as alleged.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by the Agency as
an Aircraft Worker, WG-8852-08, for the 560th Aircraft Maintenance Squadron (“AMXS”)
Maintenance Production Flight (“MXDP”) at Robins Air Force Base, Georgia.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2022003336

Complaint 1

During the relevant time frame for Complaint 1, Complainant reported to “Supervisor 1” (male,
cisgender, national origin not specified), an Aircraft Production and Overhaul Supervisor, WS-
8801-10. Supervisor 1 reported to the Flight Chief, NH-III (“Flight Chief”) who in turn reported
to the Squadron Director, NH-IV (“Squadron Director”). Complainant also reported to and
sought instruction from “Work Lead,” (male, cisgender, national origin not specified), an
Aircraft Mechanic WG-8852-10.

On December 20, 2018, Complainant filed a formal EEO Complaint (Agency No.
9R1M1900087) alleging discrimination, including a hostile work environment, on the basis of
sex (male), gender identity (man, transgender), sexual orientation, 2 and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:

       a. On or about May 2018, Supervisor 1 reassigned Complainant to work in the
          fuel tanks building;

       b. ln May 2018, someone moved Complainant’s toolbox and hid it underneath a
          wing stand;

       c. From May 2018 until July 2018, Supervisor 1 did not assign Complainant any
          aircraft worker duties to perform but only assigned fuel attendant duties;

       d. From around late June 2018 to August 2018, on a daily basis, Work Lead
          would yell at Complainant, talk to him in a demeaning manner, and would not
          help him as he did with others;

       e. In August 2018, three of his coworkers (“Coworker 1,” “Coworker 2” and
          “Coworker 3”) made false accusations against Complainant, alleging sexual
          harassment, which caused slander and defamation of his character; and



2
  Complainant testifies that his sexual orientation is straight, but during the relevant time frames,
he was married to a man. The Commission has included sexual orientation as a separate basis of
discrimination in this complaint because Complainant’s coworkers and some supervisors
reference Complainant’s same-sex relationship and/or erroneously use sexual orientation
terminology in reference to Complainant’s gender identity.

The ROI reflects that the EEO Investigator also erroneously conflated gender identity and sexual
orientation. The Commission emphasizes that gender identity and sexual orientation are distinct
concepts. See Roxanna B. v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 2020004142 (Jan. 10,
2024) (discussing terminology and providing guidance for processing and investigating
LGBTQIA+ EEO complaints).
                                             3                                   2022003336

       f. In August 2018, Complainant became aware that a co-worker hid one of
          Complainant’s tools in an attempt to get him written up.

Complaint 2

For the relevant time frame for Complaint 2, Complainant had multiple immediate supervisors:
“Supervisor 2” (male, cisgender, United States), “Supervisor 3” (male, cisgender, Caucasian),
“Supervisor 4” (male, cisgender, African-American), and “Supervisor 5” (male, cisgender,
United States). All worked as Overhaul or Production Supervisors, WS-8801-10.

On December 5, 2019, Complainant filed a Formal EEO Complaint (Agency No.
9R1M2000209) alleging discrimination, including a hostile work environment, on the bases of
sex, national origin (Hispanic), and reprisal for prior protected EEO Activity (Complaint 1).

   a. From April 2018 until as recently as October 2019, Management failed to sign off
      on training Complainant has satisfactorily completed;

   b. From November 2018 until March 2019, Complainant was verbally abused and
      subjected to a hostile work environment by a Senior Mechanic (“Trainer 1”) and
      Management (Supervisor 2 and Supervisor 3), failed to take action;

   c. In July 2019, Complainant's car keys and personal journal disappeared from his
      tool box-and when he reported this to Supervisor 4, he took no action,

   d. On multiple occasions in August 2019, a Senior Mechanic (“Trainer 2”)
      disassembled and reassembled Complainant's work, and when Complainant
      reported this to Supervisor 4, he failed to take action;

   e. Around late August 2019, a coworker (“Coworker 4”) informed Complainant that
      Trainer 2 had attempted to get her to falsely report to her supervisor that
      Complainant was sexually harassing her;

   f. Since September 11, 2019, until present (November 4, 2019), Supervisor 5
      refused to give Complainant any aircraft worker duties to perform and instead
      assigned him the task of sweeping the floors; and

   g. On October 30, 2019, Complainant received a “Notice of Termination during
      Probationary Period,” signed by the Director.

Procedural Background

For each complaint, the Agency investigated Complainant’s claims and provided him with a
Report of Investigation (“ROI”) and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (“AJ”). Complainant timely requested hearings and subsequently requested
                                               4                                   2022003336

that his complaints, which were pending under separate docket numbers, be consolidated. The AJ
granted Complainant’s request and instructed the parties to engage in discovery for both
complaints. Following a three-day hearing, the AJ issued a decision in favor of the Agency. The
Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s decision. The instant appeal
followed.

Factual Background

In April 2018, Complainant began a career-conditional appointment to the position of Aircraft
Worker, WG-8852-08, which was subject to a two-year probationary period. Complainant’s
conversion to career status depended on Management’s evaluations of his conduct and
performance, as well as his ability to complete a Formal Training Program (“FTP”). The FTP
would last 12 months with an optional four-month extension. Complainant, as a mechanic
trainee, would be evaluated by supervisors and a third-party quality assessment, all of which
would be documented through a Production Acceptance Certification System (“PACS”).

Complainant’s supervisors, trainers, and co-workers were aware of his national origin and gender
identity. Complainant spoke with a noticeable Spanish accent and, while his gender presentation
was traditionally masculine, colleagues became aware of Complainant’s transgender status and
same-sex relationship either when Complainant told them, or through gossip among other
mechanics. Some mechanics, including Supervisor 1, were already aware that Complainant
previously presented as a woman, because of his previous work for the Agency through a
contractor.

Complainant’s transition and gender-affirming medical care were the topic of gossip at the
“smoke shack,” the area where Aircraft Mechanics convened for cigarette breaks. Coworker 1
and Work Lead both testified that they were not aware that Complainant was “a transgender”
until they heard other mechanics talking about Complainant’s transition at the smoke shack.
When asked to elaborate, Work Lead testified, “They just said he was female at one point, I
don’t get into those conversations. That’s when I leave.” When asked if Complainant’s gender
identity was “widely known,” Work Lead responded, “I’m sure it was, it’s like an elementary
school, when one person knows it spreads like wildfire.” Work Lead asserted that Complainant
was “not the first LGBT person that I’ve ever worked with, you know. I could care less about
[Complainant’s] sexual preference.” Similarly, Trainer 2 recalled, “I heard it through the
grapevine” but it had “no bearing on the way you are as a person.” On cross examination Trainer
2 verified that he heard from other mechanics that Complainant was “going through that process
of changing physically…mechanics gossip, and I didn’t pay any attention to it.” Coworker 2
confirmed, “Mechanics talk…there’s more gossip being right here than there is any soap opera
that’s ever been produced.”

Multiple supervisors testified that Complainant personally told them that he was transgender.
Complainant also told some other coworkers that he was transgender and had a same-sex partner.
According to a supervisor (Supervisor 6) whom Complainant briefly worked under, “it wasn’t a
secret” that Complainant was transgender.
                                                5                                     2022003336

Supervisor 6 also recalled that in or around October 2019, he and Complainant’s work leader at
that time visited Complainant at the funeral home after Complainant’s husband died.

Only a few employees were aware of Complainant’s protected EEO activity. According to
Supervisor 6, “Once [Complainant] left my crew and went to a different crew in the same area,
he had come to me and expressed some concerns.” Supervisor 6 testified that he advised
Complainant “that if he thought he was being mistreated to report it.” Complainant reported the
alleged “mistreatment” to Supervisor 1. Both actions constitute protected EEO activity, along
with Complainant initiating the instant EEO complaints. Complainant offers no evidence that
anyone other than Supervisor 6, Supervisor 1, and Flight Chief were aware of Complainant
reporting discrimination.

Fuel Tank Assignment - Claims 1(a) and 1(c)

From April through August 2018, Complainant reported to Supervisor 1. On an unspecified
date, Complainant informed Supervisor 1 that he believed the other mechanics did not want to
work with him because he is transgender. Supervisor 1 did not take action, so Complainant
informed his second-level supervisor, Flight Chief. During the hearing, Flight Chief testified that
he “investigated” Complainant’s concern by speaking with Supervisor 1 about it. Shortly
afterward, Supervisor 1 notified Complainant that he would be assigned to the external fuel
tanks, which were in a different building than the rest of Supervisor 1’s crew.

During the hearing, Complainant argued that Supervisor 1 improperly segregated him from the
other mechanics because of his gender identity and as reprisal for voicing concerns about unfair
treatment due to his gender identity. Complainant needed to be able to work with his coworkers
in order to obtain training necessary for certification. Although fuel tanks were relevant to
mechanic duties, the assignment did not allow him to work on the full range of duties that he
needed to obtain his certifications.

The AJ found that Complainant was assigned to external fuel tanks because there was an opening
in that area. Supervisor 1 states that prior to Complainant’s hiring, he placed a request with
Flight Chief to fill a vacancy left by a fuel tank mechanic who retired. Work Lead testified that
Complainant was assigned to external fuel tanks “to fill a slot” and as “part of [Complainant’s]
training.” Work Lead confirmed that the “tank farm” falls within the aircraft mechanic job
responsibilities. In a statement for the investigative record, a Deputy Flight Chief stated that
Complainant’s assignment “was more of a training issue,” noting, “[Complainant] was new to
the 130s, the tanks in building 86 are simpler and easier to learn how to build. Work them then
move back into 91 with a better understanding of a fuel tank.”

The AJ also reasoned that Supervisor 1 “could not assign Complainant any regular mechanic
duties because Complainant had trouble getting everything accomplished and keeping things in
order.” Supervisor 1 and Deputy Flight Chief both indicated that it could take several weeks to a
couple of months for an employee to get authorized to work as a trainee. During this time, the
employee can only perform limited tasks like the ones that Complainant was assigned.
                                               6                                    2022003336

Hostile Work Environment - Claims 1(b), 1(d), 1(f) and 2(b) – 2(e)

Complainant explains that the Agency provided mechanics with a toolbox and tools, and that the
mechanics were responsible for maintaining them. As a safety precaution, all tools and supplies
had to be accounted for at the end of every shift. Complainant testified that he misplaced his
tools a number of times and he had to spend time looking for them. Sometimes the mechanics he
was assigned to work with had to assist Complainant’s search before they could leave for the
day. However, Complainant recalled an instance where he left his tools out at the instruction of
a supervisor, when they had to evacuate due to severe weather.

In May 2018, shortly after joining Supervisor 1’s crew, Complainant’s toolbox was moved to
scaffolding underneath an aircraft wing, which was not readily accessible (Claim 1(b)).
Additionally, his toolbox was attached to the scaffolding with brackets. Complainant believed
that someone on the night shift was responsible, but he did not report the incident because he
could not be sure. In August 2018, after returning to Supervisor 1’s Crew following the fuel tank
assignment, Complainant could not find one of his tools (Claim 1(f)). Another mechanic
eventually handed it to Complainant and told Complainant that their coworkers didn’t want him
to give it back. As Complainant was not sure who was responsible, he did not report this incident
either. Complainant alleges other instances when his toolbox was moved, hit with a hammer,
and had holes drilled into it, but he did not know who was responsible.

From June 2018 through August 2018, while assigned to the Fuel Tanks, Work Lead yelled at
Complainant, spoke in a demeaning manner, and would not enter a fuel tank with him (Claim
1(d)). Although the inside of a fuel tank was a confined space, Work Lead readily entered fuel
tanks with other mechanics. Work Lead and other coworkers testified that Work Lead would yell
when he got frustrated, and he was often frustrated with Complainant.

From November 2018 through March 2019, Complainant worked on a different crew, where he
first reported to Supervisor 2, and then Supervisor 3. He was assigned to shadow Trainer 1, an
experienced senior mechanic with extensive experience training new mechanics. However,
Complainant recalled that Trainer 1 would not provide him with effective training, instead
yelling at Complainant and in one instance, asking if Complainant “spoke English” (Claim 2(b)).
The record reflects that Trainer 1 was hard of hearing and often yelled, and would yell out of
frustration sometimes. When he made the comment about whether Complainant spoke English,
Management issued a “no contact” order and assigned Complainant and Trainer 1 to work in
separate areas.

After March 2019, Complainant reported to Supervisor 4. Complainant alleges that he continued
to experience harassment from coworkers. For instance, in July 2019, Complainant discovered
his keys and personal journal missing from his toolbox (Claim 2€). He notified Supervisor 4, and
Supervisor 4 states that he asked the other mechanics in the crew if they saw the items. Although
the items were later found, Complainant maintains that someone removed them from his toolbox.
                                                 7                                      2022003336

In August 2019, Complainant was paired with another Senior Mechanic (“Trainer 2”) for
training. Complainant alleges that Trainer 2 was initially friendly but started acting differently
toward him after learning that Complainant was transgender. Complainant also alleges that
Coworker 4, the only female mechanic on the crew, warned him that Trainer 2 was biased
against women. Complainant recounts that Coworker 4 told him she saw Trainer 2 wait for
Complainant to leave, then disassemble and reassemble work Complainant completed that day
(Claim 2(d)). Coworker 4 also allegedly told Complainant that Trainer 2 attempted to convince
her to lodge a false accusation of sexual harassment against Complainant with their supervisor
(Claim (e)). Trainer 2 denied the latter accusation, but acknowledged that he disassembled and
reassembled Complainant’s work. Trainer 2 testified that the work was not done correctly, and
Complainant was not around when he discovered the errors.

During the hearing, Complainant clarified his harassment claim with additional details. He
recounted an instance where he believed his lunch was tampered with because after he ate, he
felt incredibly lethargic. He prepared the meal himself and ate half of it for dinner the night
before. He was not nauseous, so he does not believe it was food poisoning. Complainant began
locking his toolbox because he did not feel safe. Complainant added more specifics to an
incident in March 2019, when Trainer 1 allegedly commented, “ladies first,” in reference to
Complainant, in front of Supervisor 2 and several coworkers when they were about to ride a golf
cart to another work area. Complainant reported the incident, and Supervisor 2 initiated an
investigation. Supervisor 2 testified that he did not hear what was said. A contemporaneous
investigative report reveals that other witnesses did not recall what was said and that
Complainant only asserted that Trainer 1 commented about him, and the other coworkers
laughed.

The AJ found that Complainant did not provide sufficient evidence to support his allegations of
harassment. Specifically, the AJ noted that Complainant described comments from coworkers
that were “infinitely more egregious” than the golf cart incident Complainant recounted in the
investigative record. The AJ concluded, “[G]iven Complainant’s inconsistencies with respect to
what was said to him in the first place, it is anyone’s guess as to what he told his superiors on the
handful of occasions when he complained to them of harassment.”

The AJ also reasoned that Complainant’s testimony during the hearing was vague and could not
be substantiated by witnesses. The AJ found that other workers moving toolboxes was a standard
complaint among mechanics, not just Complainant, and in multiple instances, the alleged hidden
belongings had been misplaced by Complainant. The AJ discounted Complainant’s explanation
that he left his tools out because a storm was coming, and his supervisor instructed him to leave
his tools. The AJ discussed the emphasis mechanics placed on maintaining the location of their
tools and found it unlikely that any mechanic would be instructed not to put away tools first
unless it was a tornado. The AJ also noted that Complainant testified that the storm would be
verifiable through an internet search, yet he did not provide such evidence. The AJ also recalled
that Complainant acknowledged that he made mistakes and needed to improve keeping track of
his tools.
                                               8                                    2022003336

To the extent that Complainant alleged verbal abuse by Work Lead and Trainer 1, the AJ found it
more likely that these coworkers were acting out of frustration with Complainant’s poor
performance, not discriminatory animus. The AJ also emphasized that Management promptly
separated Complainant and Trainer 1 when Trainer 1 made the comment about whether
Complainant spoke English.

Sexual Harassment Accusation – Claim 1(e)

In or around August 2018, after Complainant was reassigned from the fuel tanks and was
working with the other members of Supervisor 1’s crew, Coworker 1 notified Supervisor 1 that
Complainant was sexually harassing him. The actions included encroaching on Coworker 1’s
personal space, tapping Coworker 1’s shoes under the table, and, on at least two occasions,
approaching Coworker 1 with a “big grin” with arms extended for a hug, in an enthusiastic
manner that was incongruous with the work environment. Coworker 1 indicated that
Complainant’s overtures were unwelcome by leaving the room or walking to the other side of the
room when Complainant approached him. In at least one instance, Coworker 1 scooted away
from Complainant when Complainant tried to sit with him. However, Complainant assumed that
Coworker 1, a larger-sized man, was simply trying to make room, not avoid him.

Supervisor 1, Work Lead, Coworker 1, and Coworker 2 all testified that Coworker 1 was clearly
upset by Complainant’s conduct and sincerely felt that he was being harassed. In contrast,
Complainant testified that he liked Coworker 1, and believed they had a friendly relationship. He
laughed when Flight Chief informed him of Coworker 1’s complaint, as he did not think Flight
Chief was serious. Complainant asserts that Coworkers 2 and 3 must have convinced Coworker
1 to make the claim, because they did not want to work with him. Coworker 2 testified that he
and Coworker 3 never pressured Coworker 1, but they did advise him to notify Supervisor 1
when he said he felt he was being harassed.

Supervisor 1 testified that Coworker 1 appeared on the verge of tears when he reported
Complainant for harassment, and Supervisor 1 had to reassure Coworker 1 that he “did the right
thing.” Supervisor 1 then notified the Flight Chief, who notified the Squadron Director.
Squadron Director interviewed Coworker 1, Complainant, and multiple other witnesses. Flight
Chief testified that did not take disciplinary action against Complainant because he believed
Complainant’s actions were “unintentional.” Complainant and Coworker 1 were then issued a
“no contact order.” Complainant received no notice or opportunity to change his “unintentional”
conduct before the investigation and “no contact order.”

Squadron Director testified that he responded as he would to any harassment claim, and that
issuing a “no contact order” was standard protocol. However, the practical result of the “no
contact order” was that Complainant could not be in the computer room when Coworker 1 was
there, and so his communication with other crew members was effectively cut off. Complainant
requested and was granted a transfer to another crew.
                                                9                                     2022003336

The AJ found that Coworker 1’s allegation that Complainant subjected him to sexual harassment,
and Management’s subsequent response, were not motivated by discriminatory animus toward
Complainant. The AJ explained that Coworker 1 “had an untrammeled right to file a complaint,”
and that the Agency’s response to Coworker 1’s claim of harassment was made in good faith,
based on information available at the time. 3 The AJ also found Complainant’s claim that
Coworkers 2 and 3 persuaded Coworker 1 to lodge the allegation was not supported by evidence.

The AJ did not address Complainant’s assertions regarding the impact the “no contact order” had
on his working conditions. The AJ also did not address the disparity between the internal
investigation when Coworker 1 alleged harassment by Complainant compared to the
“investigation” when Complainant alleged that the other mechanics did not want to work with
him because he was transgender.

Certification, Reassignment, and Termination - Claims 2(a), 2(f), and 2(g)

In April 2019, the 12-month FTP was scheduled to conclude. Complainant lacked many of the
necessary certifications, so Management extended his FTP through August 2019. In a footnote,
the AJ observed that in the summer of 2019, Complainant’s performance was likely impacted for
outside reasons, because Complainant spent about a month sleeping at the hospital as his
husband was treated for a terminal illness. In September 2019, Complainant was relieved of his
aircraft mechanic duties after he failed a quality assessment. On October 30, 2019, Complainant
was terminated during his probationary period. The reason provided in the Agency’s Notice of
Termination was Complainant’s “inability to perform the duties of [his] position as an Aircraft
Worker.” The Notice described specific examples where Complainant failed to progress in his
training and lacked proficiency required for the position.

The AJ was not convinced by Complainant’s assertion that he was set up to fail the qualification,
as he was asked unfairly difficult or misleading questions. Among other things, the AJ pointed
out that there was no witness testimony to support that the qualification questions were unfair,
and the AJ extended Complainant’s FTP so he could have an additional opportunity to succeed.
The AJ was also unconvinced by Complainant’s claims that he was not aware that he had been
decertified for tasks he was able to complete, and that supervisors did not want to sign his
certifications. Among other things, the AJ cited record evidence of Complainant’s certifications,
Management and Complainant’s testimony, and Complainant’s performance reviews.




3
  The AJ here relied on Waggoner v. City of Garland Tex., 987 F.2d 1160, 1165 (5th Cir. 1993)
(where an accused harasser claims that disciplinary action was discriminatory, “[t]he real issue is
whether the employer reasonably believed the employee’s allegation [of harassment] and acted
on it in good faith, or to the contrary, the employer did not actually believe the co-employee’s
allegation but instead used it as a pretext for an otherwise discriminatory dismissal.”)
                                                 10                                     2022003336

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant did not file a brief in support of his appeal.

The Agency contends that the AJ properly found that the Agency provided legitimate
nondiscriminatory reasons for the personnel decisions at issue, and that these reasons were not
pretext for discrimination. The Agency further contends that Complainant’s allegations of
harassment and reprisal are not supported by any evidence aside from his own speculations.

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), all post-hearing factual findings by an AJ will be upheld if
supported by substantial evidence in the record. Substantial evidence is defined as “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.”
Universal Camera Corp. v. National Labor Relations Board, 340 U.S. 474, 477 (1951) (citation
omitted). A finding regarding whether or not discriminatory intent existed is a factual finding.
See Pullman-Standard Co. v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 293 (1982). An AJ's conclusions of law are
subject to a de novo standard of review, whether or not a hearing was held.

An AJ’s credibility determination based on the demeanor of a witness or on the tone of voice of a
witness will be accepted unless documents or other objective evidence so contradicts the
testimony, or the testimony so lacks in credibility that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it.
See EEOC Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEOC Management Directive 110),
Chapter 9, at § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015).

                                            ANALYSIS

AJ Error

The AJ erroneously interpreted Complainant’s claim that management investigated Coworker 1’s
allegation of harassment but did not do so for Complainant as “comparing apples and oranges.”
The AJ reasoned that Complainant reported harassment as an EEO complaint, which entails a
different process than notifying a supervisor of harassment. The AJ ignores the fact that
Complainant notified Supervisor 1 that he was being treated differently by his coworkers
because he was transgender in May 2018. The AJ erred by not identifying Complainant’s May
2018 action of voicing his concerns about sex discrimination to Supervisor 1 as protected EEO
activity. The AJ further erred by overlooking Supervisor 1’s response, which did not address
Complainant’s report of a hostile work environment.

Complainant makes clear that he refers to his May 2018 claim, as it resulted in his transfer
(“segregation”) to the external fuel tanks for six weeks. Supervisor 1 states in the record that in
Spring 2018, Complainant said “he felt like other employees did not want to be in close
proximity with him because of his gender change.” Supervisor 1 recalls that he responded: “The
only thing we care about is ‘do you have the capacity to get the job done?”
                                               11                                    2022003336

Complainant aptly observes that Supervisor 1’s response did not acknowledge Complainant’s
allegation. Supervisor 1 also notified Flight Chief. Flight Chief allegedly “investigated” the
matter by discussing it with Supervisor 1. Both Complainant and Coworker 1 reported alleged
sex-based harassment by team members to Supervisor 1, who in turn notified Flight Chief. The
investigation into Coworker 1’s claim involved interviewing multiple witnesses, and, despite
finding Complainant’s actions were unintentional, Flight Chief deferred to Coworker 1’s
discriminatorily based discomfort and issued a no contact order.

The Commission has taken these facts into account when assessing the AJ’s credibility
determination for Supervisor 1 and Flight Chief, and in its analysis of Claims 1(a), and 1(c). The
Commission expands on this further when analyzing Claim 1(e) as well.

AJ Credibility Determinations

The AJ heard testimony from Complainant, Squadron Director (Director of Complainant’s
division), Flight Chief (Supervisor 1’s supervisor), five of Complainant’s supervisors, Work
Lead, Trainer 2, Coworker 1, and Coworker 2. Complainant, through his attorney representative,
cross-examined the witnesses.

The AJ found that Complainant “appeared sincere in his demeanor but his testimony took many
darts and turns and led down many blind alleys. He seemed excessively unflappable when
inconsistencies in his testimony were pointed out and seemed to find it unremarkable that he
would have to revise his sworn testimony on key points.” In contrast, the AJ found that
“Complainant’s mentors and superiors gave testimony concerning the quality of performance
that was consistent and mutually reinforcing.” The AJ found that “every one of Complainant’s
supervisors credibly stated that Complainant had trouble learning new tasks and performing them
satisfactorily.” We agree with the AJ’s assessment regarding Complainant’s abilities as a
mechanic, as testimony by management officials is also supported by documentary evidence.
However, the AJ’s credibility determination for Complainant’s harassment claims overlooked
testimony by both parties.

In assessing Complainant’s credibility, the AJ was skeptical of Complainant’s assertion that the
isolation and ostracism he experienced because of his gender identity prevented him from
obtaining supporting witness testimony. The AJ noted that by Complainant’s own account, many
unidentified coworkers helped him on various tasks. The AJ reasoned, “You would think that
some of those could have supported his claim that he was a skilled mechanic who learned
quickly when someone was willing to teach him, especially if they showed a little patience.”
The AJ also noted that 25 witnesses signed a statement verifying that Complainant was relieved
of his mechanic duties and told to sweep the floor after his final quality assessment. The AJ
reasoned, “You would think that some of those same people could have supported his claim that
the final assessment by [Supervisor 5] was not a fair test and/or was not fairly conducted.”
                                                 12                                     2022003336

The Commission finds that the AJ’s emphasis on Complainant’s lack of supporting witness
testimony is misplaced. The AJ’s credibility analysis did not acknowledge that Complainant
identified a supporting witness (Coworker 4), but she was unavailable to provide testimony. The
AJ conflated signing a statement confirming that an event occurred with providing sworn
testimony about coworkers and supervisors, which, in that work environment, posed far greater
personal risk. Ample testimony from witnesses deemed credible by the AJ described rampant
workplace gossip regarding Complainant’s gender identity and sexual orientation. Witnesses
who held supervisory or leadership positions testified that they simply walked away when they
heard gossip, as it was “none of their business.” This does not speak to an environment where it
is safe for coworkers to speak up on behalf of their LGBTQIA+ colleague without fear of
repercussions through the gossip mill. Moreover, mechanics relied on each other for their
physical safety. Complainant also testified to a culture of unreported bullying, but the AJ
downplayed the physical destruction of Complainant’s property. It is not inconceivable that
witnesses willing to assist Complainant with his assignments were not willing to testify on his
behalf.

The AJ also disregarded and discounted testimony supporting Complainant’s assertion that
Supervisor 1 and Coworker 1 indicated bias against individuals within the LGBTQIA+
community. During the hearing, Coworker 1 testified, “I have nothing against [Complainant],
none at all; but I just don’t agree…[with] his lifestyle. But it’s just not my lifestyle…I just don’t
agree with it.” Supervisor recounted that Coworker 1 was very concerned that Complainant was
“trying to put moves on him,” stating “I want everybody to know I’m a happily married man,
and there’s no way that I’m going to be doing any of that kind of stuff with him.” Supervisor 1
testified that he took the harassment allegation seriously after Coworker 1 reported it and he
(Supervisor 1) witnessed Complainant acting “flamboyantly” toward Coworker 1. Supervisor 1
described Coworker 1 as “visibly shaken” and recounted that he had to “reassure [Coworker 1]
that he was doing the right thing by telling his supervisor.”

The AJ found Supervisor 1’s use of the term “flamboyant” to describe Complainant’s conduct
toward Coworker 1, did not constitute evidence of discriminatory bias. The AJ’s Decision
acknowledged Complainant’s explanation that “flamboyant” is a “potentially neutral term with
potentially discriminatory connotations which must be placed in context for the purpose of
inferring discriminatory motive.” Nevertheless, the AJ explained that in context, Supervisor 1
had “reasonable concerns,” and Supervisor 1’s “full statement was that Complainant approached
[Coworker 1] ‘flamboyantly (arms up and open like to hug).’ Such behavior might be described
as typical at a family reunion but could reasonably be described as flamboyant in an industrial
setting.” The AJ ignored the additional, highly relevant context, that the individual whose
actions were described as “flamboyant” is a transgender man in a same-sex relationship.
Moreover, upon cross-examination, Supervisor 1 testified that he was aware of the connotation
of the word “flamboyant” with gay stereotypes, and that was why he used it to describe
Complainant’s conduct.
                                               13                                    2022003336

Regarding Complainant’s mentors and supervisors’ role in the hostile work environment, the AJ
concluded, “I find it plausible that they might take a harsh tone given the problems with training
Complainant that they described. If they engaged in even a small portion of the Machiavellian
plotting that Complainant alleged, you would think that at least one of the[m] would have slipped
up badly enough to provide fodder for cross-examination but that was not the case.” We agree
with the AJ’s assessment that Complainant offered additional details and events that were not
included in the ROI, particularly with respect to the golf cart incident. However, the AJ’s use of
the descriptor “Machiavellian” unnecessarily and inaccurately trivializes Complainant’s
overarching harassment complaint. Supervisor 1 and Flight Chief did “provide fodder” but the
AJ disregarded it. Specifically, the disparity in Management’s response about Complainant’s
allegations of hostile work environment (coworkers allegedly did not want to work with him due
to his protected classes) and Management’s response to Coworker 1’s allegations of hostile work
environment. Supervisor 1, Coworker 1 and Coworker 2 all provide testimony reflecting
Coworker 1’s discomfort with Complainant’s sexual orientation and gender identity.

As for Complainant’s demeaner and “unflappability,” we note that multiple witnesses, deemed
credible by the AJ, recalled that English was clearly not Complainant’s first language. According
to his supervisors, Complainant would often indicate understanding when someone explained a
concept, and subsequently demonstrate a lack of understanding during practical application.
Overall, the AJ discounted key elements of both Complainant and witness testimony when
assessing credibility. Therefore, the Commission is not bound by the AJ’s credibility
determinations.

Disparate Treatment – Claims 2(a), 2(f), and 2(g)

A disparate treatment analysis is applicable to the Agency’s alleged discriminatory actions in
2(a), 2(f), and 2(g), because certification, reassignment, and termination are discrete employment
actions, timely raised with an EEO Counselor. 4

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). See also Loeb v. Textron, 600
F.2d 1003 (1st Cir. 1979). For a complainant to prevail, they must first establish a prima facie
case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an
inference of discrimination, that is, that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse
employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters,
438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep’t of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450


4
 Claims 1(a) and 1(c) are also timely raised discrete acts, but we determine that they are more
appropriately addressed alongside Claim 1(e) as part of a hostile work environment claim. As the
AJ and Agency applied a disparate treatment analysis for Claims 1(a) and 1(c), we have
considered the Agency’s proffered legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions in our
hostile work environment analysis.
                                                 14                                     2022003336

U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate
responsibility to persuade the fact-finder, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the agency
acted on the basis of a prohibited reason (i.e. discrimination). St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks,
509 U.S. 502 (1993).

Complainant can establish a prima facie case of reprisal by showing that: (1) Complainant
engaged in protected activity; (2) the Agency was aware of the protected activity; (3)
subsequently, Complainant was subjected to adverse treatment by the Agency; and (4) a nexus
exists between the protected activity and the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Department of the
Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000). Complainant can establish a prima
facie case of reprisal by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference
of discrimination. Shapiro v. Social Security Admin., EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6,
1996) (citing McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802). In general, a complainant can demonstrate a
causal connection using temporal proximity when the separation between the employer's
knowledge of the protected activity and the adverse action is very close. See Clark County
School District v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268 (2001) (holding that a three-month period was not
proximate enough to establish a causal nexus).

Complainant fulfilled prong 1 of the prima facie analysis because he engaged in protected EEO
activity in May 2018, when he notified Supervisor 1 that he believed his coworkers did not want
to work with him because of his gender identity and in December 2018, when he initiated
Complaint 1. However, Complainant has not met the requirement under Prong (2) of the analysis
because there is no evidence that the management officials and/or coworkers named in
Complaint 2 were aware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity.

In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on national origin and sex, a
complainant may show: (1) that they are a member of a protected group; (2) that they were
subjected to an adverse employment action; and (3) that they were treated less favorably than
other similarly situated employees outside of their protected group(s). We note that it is not
necessary for a complainant to rely strictly on comparative evidence to establish the inference of
discriminatory motivation required to support a prima facie case. O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin
Caterers Corp., 517 U.S. 308, 312 (1996); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on O'Connor v.
Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., EEOC Notice No. 915.002, n. 4 (September 18, 1996).

Complainant meets the requirements under Prongs (1) and (2). Complainant established that he is
a member of protected groups based on his national origin (Hispanic) and gender identity
(transgender). He also established that he was subject to adverse employment actions when, in
Claim 2(a) Management would not certify his training, in Claim 2(f) he was relieved of his
mechanic duties, and, in Claim 2(g) he was terminated during his probationary period.

For Prong (3) of the prima facie analysis, Complainant has not identified any similarly-situated
employees outside his protected categories who were treated more favorably than he was. See
EEOC Compliance Manual, Section 604, “Theories of Discrimination” (Jun. 1, 2006)
(individuals will qualify as comparators only where they reasonably can be expected to receive
                                                15                                    2022003336

the same treatment in the context of the employment action at issue); see also, Reardon v. United
States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120071576 (June 4, 2009) (When establishing
discriminatory intent, non-probationary employees are not “similarly situated” comparators for a
probationary complainant.)

Nevertheless, Complainant has successfully established Prong (3) by setting forth evidence of
acts from which, if otherwise unexplained, an inference of sex or national origin discrimination
could be drawn. See Furnco, 438 U.S. at 576. Regarding national origin, the record reflects that
supervisors and trainers felt that Complainant’s Spanish accent was a factor in their difficulty
training him. During the applicable time frame for Complaint 2, Trainer 1 commented to
Complainant, “Don’t you speak English?” Regarding sex-based discrimination, record testimony
reflects that Complainant’s transgender status and the gender affirming treatment he received
prior to accepting his position at AMXS/MXDP were topics of gossip. Complainant also
recounted conversations with the only female mechanic on Supervisor 4’s crew 5 that led him to
believe Management intended to set him up for failure because they did not perceive him to be a
straight cisgender man.

Once Complainant establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the agency to articulate
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. While the burden upon the agency to
articulate a reason is not an onerous one, Commission precedent holds that the agency must set
forth with sufficient clarity reasons for its actions such that the complainant has a full and fair
opportunity to demonstrate that those reasons are pretext. See Parker v. United States Postal
Service, EEOC Request No. 05900110 (Apr. 30, 1990); Lorenzo v. Department of Defense,
EEOC Request No. 05950931 (Nov. 6, 1997). Here, the record supports the AJ’s finding that the
Agency provided legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.

We find that the Agency has set forth legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions in
Claims 2(a), 2(f), and 2(g). All boil down to Complainant’s capabilities and performance in the
position of aircraft mechanic during his probationary period.

For Claim 2(a), the Agency asserts that Complainant, due to his poor performance, simply was
not qualified to obtain some of the required certifications. The Agency also contradicts Claim
2(a) by citing Complainant’s own testimony, which reveals that multiple supervisors did certify
him on a number of tasks. Also, when Complainant transferred from Supervisor 1’s crew to
Supervisor 2, he asked Supervisor 2 to decertify him on several tasks that he did not feel
comfortable performing.




5
 This co-worker (“Coworker 4”) was unavailable to provide testimony for the hearing and the
ROI. The record reflects that the Agency’s EEO Investigator and Agency Counsel each made
multiple good faith efforts to obtain the coworker’s testimony.
                                               16                                    2022003336

For Claim 2(f), the Agency asserts that it relieved Complainant of his duties because he did not
pass the quality assessment. This reason is consistent with the Agency’s Formal Training
Program (“FTP”).

For Claim 2(g), the Agency asserts that Complainant was terminated during his probationary
period because of his performance and lack of improvement over a training period of 16 months.
Commission precedent and federal law view the probationary period as an opportunity for an
employer to judge an employee’s suitability and make a final decision about retaining or
separating without the necessity of showing “just cause.” Alex L. v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120172851 (Jun. 28, 2018) (citing Complainant v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal
No. 0120130492 (May 07, 2015) (despite some questionable reasons being provided to remove
Complainant, a probationary employee, there was insufficient evidence to show the Agency did
so because of her protected class, noting that that the record established Complainant was
perceived as being a difficult employee with substandard interpersonal skills)), Tilford v. Dep’t
Homeland Sec., Appeal No. 0120071252 (May 14, 2007) (reasoning that the probationary period
is a test of actual performance on the job gives the supervisor an opportunity to observe the
employee’s demonstrated capacity for the position), Harmon v. Dep’t of Commerce, EEOC
Appeal No. 01A33155 (Sept. 11, 2003) (poor performance and lack of improvements after
receiving additional training sufficient legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for termination
during probationary period).

In his closing statement for the hearing, Complainant argued that the Agency’s proffered reason,
poor performance, is pretext for discrimination because the Agency’s discriminatory actions
caused his poor performance. Complainant asserts that his performance shortcomings and
ultimately his termination arose from Supervisor 1 segregating him to a location and tasks that
were not conducive to his mechanic training, and Complainant’s colleagues’ refusal to properly
train him due to his protected classes. Complainant also argues that the Agency presented him
with a misleading question, and insisted on subjecting him to qualification assessment when it
was aware he was experiencing stress outside of work due to his husband’s terminal illness.

The Commission has found that an agency’s articulated reason of “poor performance” may be
pretext for discriminatory motive, where the agency’s failure to train the complainant caused the
poor performance. See Hayes v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120070965 (Jan.
3, 2008) (the complainant, who was terminated during his probationary period for poor
performance, provided evidence that he received significantly less on-the-job training (50 instead
of 90 days) than employees outside his protected class). Alternatively, an agency’s articulated
reason of “poor performance” may be pretext for discriminatory motive when the record contains
conflicting evidence. See, Complainant v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0720130027
(Mar. 4, 2015) (discrimination and reprisal found where the supervisor’s testimony attributing
the complainant’s termination to “performance problems” conflicted with testimony from the
complainant’s mentor who said they did not witness any performance problems, and where the
AJ found the supervisor’s testimony was not credible),
                                                17                                    2022003336

For the majority of his tenure with the Agency, Complainant reported to a different crew, away
from Supervisor 1 and his former team. Multiple supervisors and trainers, with first-hand
knowledge of Complainant’s abilities and work product after he left Supervisor 1’s team,
testified to deficiencies in Complainant’s performance. These individuals did not indicate
discriminatory bias in their testimony or actions, as Supervisor 1 and Flight Chief did. Likewise,
these supervisors were unaware of Complainant’s prior protected EEO activity. All consistently
testified to their efforts to pair Complainant with experienced mechanics who could train him.
Complainant has not offered any conflicting evidence, aside from his own assertions, to refute
the Agency’s claims about his performance.

We agree with the AJ’s observation that Complainant’s claim of discriminatory termination and
lack of training is undermined by the fact that the Agency extended Complainant’s probationary
period by four months to provide Complainant an opportunity to obtain the necessary training for
certification. Taking into account the lower threshold for terminating probationary employees,
the difficulty of the certifications, and the additional opportunity provided to Complainant to
obtain the certifications, we find that Complainant did not establish, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that his termination was motivated by discriminatory animus.

We note that pretext does not require an agency's actions to be impeccable. Terese D. v. United
States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2022003760 (Sept. 12, 2023). Rather, the focus is on
whether there was discriminatory animus on the part of the Agency when it engaged in the
challenged conduct. Id. Complainant sets forth no evidence aside from his own assertions. We
agree with the AJ’s characterization of Complainant’s arguments for Claims 2(a), 2(f) and 2(g)
as a “difference of opinion” regarding his aptitude as a mechanic.

At all times the ultimate burden of persuasion remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency was motivated by prohibited discrimination.
Here, Complainant has not shown, by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s
proffered legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons were pretext for discrimination.

Hostile Work Environment

In order to establish a prima facie case of harassment on the basis of sex, national origin, and/or
reprisal, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of five
elements: (1) that they are a member of a statutorily protected class and/or engaged in protected
EEO activity; (2) that they were subjected to unwelcome conduct related to their sex, national
origin, and/or protected EEO activity; (3) that the harassment complained of was based on their
of sex, national origin, and/or protected EEO activity; (4) that the harassment had the purpose or
effect of unreasonably interfering with their work performance and/or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) that there is a basis for imputing liability to the
employer. Celine B. v. Dep’t of Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001961 (Sept. 21, 2020).
                                                18                                    2022003336

It is undisputed that Complainant fulfilled Prong 1 of the prima facie analysis based on his
gender identity and national origin. For his reprisal claim, we find that Complainant fulfilled
Prong 1 because he engaged in protected EEO activity in May 2018, when he notified Supervisor
1 that he believed his coworkers did not want to work with him because of his gender identity,
and in December 2018, when he initiated Complaint 1. At issue are the remaining elements of
the prima facie analysis.

To establish that harassment was motivated by reprisal, a complainant must demonstrate that the
alleged harasser was aware of the protected activity. Whitmire v. Department of the Air Force,
EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000). For instance, temporal proximity between an
employer's knowledge of protected activity and an adverse action is sufficient evidence of
causality to establish a prima facie case of reprisal if such temporal proximity is “very close.”
Jaleesa P. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 2020003940 (Oct. 26, 2021) citing
Complainant v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A04472 (Sept. 14, 2001)
(stating that “the causal connection may be shown by evidence that the adverse treatment
followed the protected activity within such a period of time and in such a manner that a reprisal
motive is inferred”) other citations omitted.

Here, Complainant established a temporal connection between his protected EEO activity
(reporting alleged discrimination to Supervisor 1) and the events in Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e),
because the events in these claims all occurred within three months of the protected EEO activity
and involved the same management officials. The Agency’s actions in Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e)
are also connected in that they demonstrated management’s disregard for Complainant’s
discrimination allegation and exacerbated Complainant’s isolation from his team members.
Complainant successfully established a nexus between his protected EEO activity and Claims
1(a), 1(c), and 1(e), thereby meeting the prima facie elements for reprisal.

Complaint 1 – Harassment Analysis

Claims 1(b), 1(d), and 1(f)

Regarding Claims 1(b) (unidentified coworker(s) hid and damaged Complainant’s toolbox), 1(f)
(unidentified coworker withheld Complainant’s tool in an effort to get him written up), and 1(d)
(Work Lead yelled at and would not help Complainant on a daily basis), Complainant failed to
establish Prongs 2 and 3 of the prima facie analysis. We concur with the AJ’s reasoning that
Complainant did not provide specific examples, supporting witness testimony, or other evidence
that the conduct identified in these claims was related to or based on his sex, national origin, or
protected EEO activity.
                                               19                                    2022003336

Claim 1(e)

For Claim 1(e), Complainant fulfilled Prong 2 of the prima facie analysis for sex discrimination
because the alleged discriminatory action, false reports of sexual harassment, describes unwanted
conduct related to Complainant’s sex (gender identity and sexual orientation). Complainant did
not provide evidence to connect the Agency’s action to his national origin or reprisal.

For purposes of establishing prong 3 of the prima facie analysis, Coworker 1’s characterization
of Complainant’s gender identity and sexual orientation as a “lifestyle” that he does not agree
with indicates that his action was influenced by discriminatory animus. However, we agree with
the AJ’s determination that the report and subsequent investigation into Complainant’s conduct
was based on a good-faith belief that Coworker 1 felt harassed. Other coworkers consistently
testified that they witnessed Complainant act in a manner incongruous with workplace norms,
that made Coworker 1 visibly embarrassed and uncomfortable. Complainant only acted in this
manner toward Coworker 1, and he did so on multiple occasions over a period of weeks. The
AJ’s analysis aptly noted Coworker 1‘s right to pursue a harassment allegation. Also, the
Commission has held that where an investigation was taken “within the exercise of managerial
authority to ensure the efficient and orderly operation of the office,” it does not constitute
harassment. See Sandy S. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2022000765 (Feb. 14,
2023) citing Erika H. v. Dep’t of Transport., EEOC Appeal No. 0120151781 (Jun. 16, 2017).
Additionally, Complainant has not presented any evidence to support his assertion that Coworker
2 and Coworker 3 pressured or influenced Coworker 1 to file a false report.

However, we find that the AJ erred by limiting his analysis of Claim 1(e) to Coworker 1’s
decision to report sexual harassment and Management’s decision to investigate Coworker 1’s
claim. While these acts do not constitute harassment, the Agency’s response to the claim and
investigation, a “no contact order,” resulted in a hostile work environment for Complainant. The
Commission has previously found that supervisory or co-worker confusion or anxiety regarding
another employee’s gender identity cannot justify discrimination. See Hillier v. Dep’t of the
Treas., EEOC Appeal No. 0120150248 (Apr. 21, 2016).

Squadron Director testified:

       I didn’t think there was intentional harassment, but [Coworker 1] was adamant
       that he was uncomfortable with the proximity of [Complainant] and unwanted
       touching. And so I brought [Complainant] in and talked to him about the
       complaint and then the result of that was I put a non-contact order in place to keep
       the two individuals separate while at work.

The Commission looks askance at Squadron Director’s decision, following the investigation, to
issue a “no contact” order to Complainant and Coworker 1. Based on his investigation, which
consisted of speaking with Coworker 1, Complainant, and witnesses, Squadron Director
concluded that Complainant’s conduct was unintentional. Coworker 1 conveyed discomfort by
moving away from Complainant, but he never told Complainant to stop the conduct.
                                               20                                   2022003336

Neither Supervisor 1 nor Flight Chief informed Complainant that his conduct made Coworker 1
uncomfortable, or asked Complainant to stop. Complainant was not afforded an opportunity to
change his unintentional conduct. In contrast, Squadron Director did not conduct a investigation
when Complainant reported discriminatory treatment to Supervisor 1, evincing disparate
treatment sufficient to raise an inference of discriminatory animus. The preponderance of the
evidence establishes prong 3, discriminatory motivation, of the prima facie analysis for
harassment.

With respect to prong 4, the harassment investigation and its result had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with Complainant’s work performance and creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive environment. Complainant could not enter the break room or use computers
when Coworker 1 was present or interact with the other team members when everyone was
together. Complainant became so uncomfortable and his ability to train and perform his duties
was so impacted that he requested (and was granted) reassignment. As with Claims 1(a) and
1(c), Management’s action in Claim 1(e) had the purpose or effect of banishing Complainant.
Likewise, because Management was responsible for the adverse action, Complainant had a basis
for imputing liability to the Agency, meeting the requirement under prong 5 of the prima facie
analysis.

Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e)

As mentioned at note 3, supra, the Commission finds it appropriate to analyze Claims 1(a) and
1(c) as hostile work environment because they relate to Claim 1(e). All three claims overlap in
time and contributed to Complainant’s ostracism from his team. Moreover, these actions reflect
a tacit approval of ostracism due to gender identity. For instance, Claims 1(a) and 1(e), when
considered together, reveals a lack of consistency when responding to allegations of a
discriminatory hostile work environment. Complainant’s allegation of ostracism based on his
gender identity was disregarded and he was separated further through reassignment. Coworker 1,
a straight, cisgender man, raised a complaint based in part on his own discriminatory attitude
toward Complainant’s same-sex marriage and transgender status. Not only was Coworker 1’s
complaint taken seriously, but also his discriminatory attitude was validated and indulged by
Supervisor 1 and Flight Chief to Complainant’s professional detriment. Meanwhile, management
and coworkers did nothing to quell the ongoing gossip about Complainant’s gender identity.
Moreover, no one stood up for Complainant. This marked apathy regarding Complainant’s
treatment over a prolonged period of time is highly relevant to the existence of a hostile work
environment.

For Prongs 2 and 3 of the prima facie analysis, Complainant established that his transfer to the
fuel tanks (Claim 1(a)), and periodic assignment to the fuel tanks (Claim 1(c)) was unwelcome
conduct related to his sex (orientation and gender identity) and his protected EEO activity.
Complainant expressly voiced his concerns to Supervisor 1 that his co-workers did not want to
work with him because of his gender identity, and soon afterward, he was assigned to work in
another building.
                                                21                                     2022003336

Shortly after his return to Supervisor 1’s crew, Complainant was accused of sexual harassment
by a coworker (Claim 1(e)), who testified that he did not agree with Complainant’s “lifestyle,”
and was concerned that Complainant was “hitting on him.”

For Prong (4), Complainant established that the Agency’s action in Claim 1(a) unreasonably
interfered with his work performance and perpetuated his ostracism from Supervisor 1’s team.
Specifically, the record supports Complainant’s contention that his fuel tank assignment deprived
him of opportunities for training necessary for any probationary trainee. Both Work Lead and
Supervisor 1 characterize the external fuel tank position as a “voluntary” assignment, that aircraft
mechanics could request. This, along with the Deputy Flight Chief’s characterization of external
fuel tanks as “easier,” and their physical separation from the aircraft hangar (Building 91) tends
to support Complainant’s claim that his placement in external fuel tanks prevented him from
receiving experience and training necessary for certification. Although the AJ states that
Supervisor 1 granted Complainant’s request to switch assignments on his “next shift,” we note
that shift changes occurred every six weeks.

The Agency argued, and provided supporting evidence, that the need to fill a position in external
fuel pre-dated Complainant’s employment with the Agency, due to a worker’s retirement. In
addition, it was Flight Chief (Supervisor 1’s supervisor), not Supervisor 1, who made the
decision to place Complainant. Multiple supervisors, in addition to Supervisor 1, testified that
the external fuel tank assignments were necessary for Complainant’s training, and could be
performed on days Complainant forgot his credentials to access the Agency’s online system.
However, these legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons are outweighed by the evidence of reprisal
and unreasonable interference with Complainant’s work performance. Specifically, the
prolonged duration of the assignment, Complainant’s time-sensitive need to obtain certifications,
and the perpetuation of the ostracism at the time of the reassignment created a foreseeable
disadvantage for Complainant’s professional development and working relationships with
members on his team.

Likewise, for Claim 1(c), Complainant established that the Agency’s action unreasonably
interfered with his work performance and perpetuated his ostracism from Supervisor 1’s team.
Supervisor 1 assigned Complainant fuel attendant duties from time to time even after
Complainant changed back to a shift within the aircraft hangar with Supervisor 1. The Agency
explained that fuel tank duties did not require a Common Access Card (“CAC”). A CAC is
necessary to access the Agency’s online training system, which is required for working on
aircraft. Therefore, Supervisor 1 assigned Complainant to fuel tank duties on days Complainant
forgot his CAC, and when he had difficulty assigning Complainant to other duties. The AJ,
noting that other supervisors consistently testified regarding Complainant’s poor work product,
and that Complainant acknowledged that he had difficulties with his CAC, accepted the
Agency’s explanation.

While Complainant may have been difficult to work with or had poor work product, more likely
than not discriminatory animus influenced Supervisor 1’s difficulty placing Complainant with
other workers.
                                               22                                    2022003336

Supervisor 1 testified that “a lot of mechanics talk about [Complainant’s] work and don't want to
be assigned to --work with him; so it's very hard to place him.” Yet, Supervisor 1 indicted that
Complainant’s sex was also a consideration, testifying that out of approximately 30 people on his
crew, Complainant was the only mechanic to have a “sexual harassment issue.” Additionally,
the discriminatorily applied “no contact order” impacted Complainant’s access to the computer
room, hindering his ability to be paired with others, as he could not use those computers while
Coworker 1 was there. The AJ disregarded the connection between the sexual harassment
investigation and no contact order (Claim 1(e)), Supervisor 1’s prior failure to address
Complainant’s concerns that his coworkers did not want to work with him because of his gender
identity (Claim 1(a)), and the rampant gossip about Complainant’s gender identity, all taking
place during the time frame for Claim 1(c). In light of this additional context, Claim 1(c)
satisfies Prong 4 of the prima facie analysis.

As for Prong 5 of the prima facie analysis, Complainant’s supervisors orchestrated the events in
Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e). We therefore find that a basis for imputing liability to the Agency.

Based on the foregoing, we find that claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e), when considered together,
constitute a hostile work environment.

Complaint 2 – Harassment Analysis

For Claims 2(a), 2(f), and 2(g), we already determined in the “Disparate Treatment” section of
this Decision that Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that these
actions were motivated discrimination or reprisal. Therefore, these claims cannot be considered
as part Complainant’s hostile work environment claim. See Oakley v. United States Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

For Claims 2(b), 2(c), 2(d), and 2(e), it is undisputed that Complainant meets the requirements
under Prong (1) of the analysis. However, as discussed in the “Disparate Treatment” section,
Complainant cannot establish a prima facie case for reprisal because there is no evidence that the
individuals accused of harassment in Complaint 2 were aware of Complainant’s prior EEO
activity. Applying the prima facie analysis for a hostile work environment based on sex and/or
national origin, the AJ properly found that Complainant either did not present sufficient evidence
that events occurred as alleged, or he did not establish Prong (5) of the analysis, a basis for
imputing liability to the Agency.

Regarding Claim 2(b), Trainer 1 yelled at Complainant, and in one instance appeared to
reference his national origin by asking if he spoke English. However, we agree with the AJ’s
finding that Management took immediate and appropriate corrective action. Specifically,
Management told Trainer 1 that his comment was unacceptable, then made sure that
Complainant and Trainer 1 were assigned to separate work areas to prevent further interaction.
                                               23                                   2022003336

Regarding Claim 2(c), we agree with the AJ’s finding that Supervisor 4 did take action when
Complainant reported various belongings missing and that Complainant did not provide
sufficient evidence that these incidents occurred as alleged.

Regarding Claim 2(d), we agree with the AJ’s finding that Trainer 2’s action of disassembling
and reassembling Complainant’s work did not amount to harassment. Trainer 2 testified that
Complainant did not perform the work correctly and, as Complainant was not available when
Trainer 2 discovered the errors, Trainer 2 redid Complainant’s work. Supervisor 4 testified that
after Complainant alerted him to the issue, he spoke with Trainer 2, and found Trainer 2’s
explanations consistent with Agency safety policy. Even if Trainer 2 intentionally waited for
Complainant to leave before disassembling and reassembling Complainant’s work, this occurred
3 times at most. We have repeatedly found that allegations of a few isolated incidents of alleged
harassment usually are not sufficient to state a harassment claim. See Phillips v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Request No. 05960030 (July 12, 1996) see also Banks v. Dep’t of
Health and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05940481 (Feb. 16, 1995).

Regarding Claim 2(e), Complainant did not set forth sufficient evidence that Trainer 2 asked
Coworker 5 to falsely report Complainant for sexual harassment. Therefore, Complainant has not
met his evidentiary burden to establish a hostile work environment regarding the claims raised in
Complaint 2.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we MODIFY the Agency’s Final Order.

The Agency’s final order is AFFIRMED with respect to Claims 1(b), 1(d), 1(f), and Complaint
2.

The Agency’s final order is REVERSED with respect to Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e).

We hereby REMAND Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e) for further processing in accordance with this
Decision and the following Order.

                                            ORDER

       1. Compensatory Damages. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this
          decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct and complete a supplemental
          investigation to determine whether Complainant is entitled to compensatory
          damages violating Title VII of the Civil Rights Act (“Title VII”). In so doing,
          the Agency shall:

           a. Issue a notice to Complainant of his right to submit evidence based our
              guidance in Carle v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan.
                                              24                                    2022003336

              5, 1993) and request evidence from Complainant in support of
              compensatory damages. 6 The Notice shall provide Complainant with
              thirty (30) calendar days to respond (with an option and instructions to
              request an extension in the case of extenuating circumstances).
              Complainant has a duty to cooperate with Agency’s investigation to
              determine compensatory damages, including responding to agency
              requests for documentation or completing agency forms.

          b. Issue a new final agency decision (“Compensatory Damages FAD”) based
             on the findings of the supplemental investigation. The Compensatory
             Damages FAD shall state the amount (if any) of compensatory damages
             owed to Complainant and explain how the Agency determined that
             amount. The Compensatory Damages FAD shall include appeal rights to
             the Commission.

          c. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Compensatory Damages
             FAD is issued, the Agency shall pay Complainant the amount of
             compensatory damages it determined are owed. If there is a dispute over
             the exact amount of compensatory damages owed, the Agency shall pay
             the undisputed amount to Complainant. If Complainant disagrees with the
             agency’s award, they may challenge the Agency’s decision on the amount
             of compensatory damages by filing an appeal of the Compensatory
             Damages FAD with the Commission. Instructions on how to appeal,
             including the deadline to file, will be included in the appeal rights portion
             of the Compensatory Damages FAD.

       2. Training. The Agency shall provide the following training. For assistance in
          obtaining the necessary training, the Agency may contact the Commission’s
          Outreach, Training and Engagement Division via email, at
          FederalTrainingandOutreach@eeoc.gov. The Agency shall provide the
          Compliance Officer with proof of attendance, as well as the contents and
          materials it used for the training.


6
   To establish entitlement to compensatory damages, the evidence must show a causal
relationship between the Agency’s discriminatory action and any pecuniary (monetary) or non-
pecuniary losses/harm experienced by Complainant. For more information on evidence to
determine compensatory damages: EEOC Management Directive 110, Ch. 11 § VII (Aug. 5,
2015), available at https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/directives/md-110_chapter_11.cfm (provides
the types of compensatory damages available under EEOC statutes and “Objective Evidence” of
entitlement); and N. Thompson, “Compensatory Damages in the Federal Sector: An Overview,”
EEOC        Digest     Vol.     XVI,      No.     1     (Winter     2005)    available    at
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/digest/xvi-1.cfm#article (explains Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy
under the subsection “Proof of Damages”).
                                          25                                     2022003336


   a. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
      Agency shall provide all Aircraft Mechanics within the 560th AMXS with
      at least 1 hour of interactive training on sex discrimination under Title VII,
      with an emphasis on LGBTQIA+ harassment. The training shall address
      how coworkers can recognize and help prevent a hostile work
      environment on the bases of sex, sexual orientation and gender identity.

   b. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
      individuals identified in this decision as “Supervisor 1,” “Flight Chief,”
      and “Squadron Director” shall complete 2 hours of live training with a
      subject matter expert (agency employee or a contractor) on the Agency’s
      obligations under Title VII, with an emphasis on sexual orientation,
      gender identity, and reprisal. The training shall include examples and
      explanations of what constitutes protected EEO activity, and reprisal. The
      training shall also address the facts specific to this case and discuss how
      Management should respond differently if confronted with similar
      scenarios in the future. If Supervisor 1, Flight Chief, and/or Squadron
      Director have since left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish
      documentation of their departure dates.

3. Disciplinary Action. Within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from
   the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall consider disciplining the
   individuals identified in this decision as “Supervisor 1,” “Flight Chief,” and
   “Squadron Director” for subjecting Complainant to disparate treatment and a
   hostile work environment, in violation of Title VII. The Commission does not
   consider training to be disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its
   decision to the Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary
   action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take
   disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose
   discipline. If Supervisor 1, Flight Chief, and/or Squadron Director have since
   left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of their
   departure dates.

4. Posting Notice. The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the section
   listed below, entitled “Posting Order.” The Agency shall provide the
   Compliance Officer with the original signed and dated notice, reflecting the
   dates that the notice was posted, along with evidence that the notice was
   physically posted at the facility and electronically.
                                               26                                   2022003336

       5. Attorney Fees. The Agency shall pay Complainant reasonable attorney’s fees
          for services arising from adjudication of Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e), in
          accordance with the section listed below, entitled “Attorney’s Fees.” 7

           a. Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
              Agency shall send a copy of this Decision to Complainant’s legal counsel
              of record by certified mail and email.

           b. The time frames provided in the “Attorney’s Fees” portion of this Order
              shall be calculated based on Legal Counsel’s earliest confirmed receipt of
              this Decision.

       6. Compliance Report. The Agency shall submit a report of compliance in
          digital format in accordance with the section listed below, entitled
          "Implementation of the Commission's Decision."

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H0124)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), they are entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its 560th Aircraft Maintenance Squadron (“AMXS”)
Maintenance Production Flight (“MXDP”) at Robins Air Force Base, Georgia, copies of the
attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered,
defaced, or covered by any other material.

7
  Although Complainant did not submit an appeal brief, the Commission relied heavily on the
hearing record containing work product from Complainant’s attorney (e.g., cross examination,
closing statement, briefs in support of complainant) to arrive at this decision. Therefore,
Complainant is entitled to any prior attorney fees for services resulting in Complainant’s status
as the prevailing party (Claims 1(a), 1(c), and 1(e) only) in this decision. Should Complainant
hire an attorney to assist with implementation of the compensatory damages order, Complainant
is entitled to reasonable attorney fees for those services as well.
                                                27                                    2022003336

The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the
paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of
the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format and must be submitted
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision.
                                                  28                                    2022003336

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party
shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0124)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires the Agency
to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your complaint. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar
days from the date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint which
the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for
continued administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its final decision on
your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full
name and official title.
                                               29                                    2022003336

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will
terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 23, 2024
Date
