           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Angela R, 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                            Christine Wormuth,
                                 Secretary,
                          Department of the Army,
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2022003249


                    Agency No. ARCEHECSA22OCT00215

                                  DECISION

On May 24, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a), from the Agency’s final decision concerning her equal
employment       opportunity    (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq. For the following reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision
finding no discrimination.

                             ISSUES PRESENTED

The issue presented before the Commission is whether Complainant has
proven that the Agency subjected her to discrimination and/or harassment
based on her color, race, disability, sex and in reprisal for protected EEO
activity.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                          2022003249

                               BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Contract Specialist, GS-1102-12, with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), Honolulu District.

On December 2, 2021, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the
Agency subjected her to hostile workplace discrimination based on her race
(African-American),    sex     (female),     color    (Black),    disability
(Anxiety/Depression/Low Vision), and reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity when:

   1. Beginning in June 2021, the following office and/or individuals
   have denied her request(s) for reasonable accommodation: the
   Honolulu District (POH) Contracting Office; the Pacific Ocean Division
   (POD) EEO Manager; the Pacific Ocean Alaska (POA) District EEO
   Specialist; the Captain, and the CEHEC-EO EEO Specialist;

   2. As recently as July 2021, she was overly criticized by a co-worker;

   3. In July 2021, she was singled out and excluded from performing
   an important job function, specifically attending a site visit;

   4. In July 2021, she was singled out and excluded from attending a
   lunch celebrating a co-worker’s birthday hosted by the Lieutenant
   Colonel;

   5. On or about August 25, 2021, the POD and/or POA EEO Office and
   the POH Contracting Management Team denied her request for
   mediation;

   6. On or about October 1, 2021, the POH Contracting Team, the POH
   Human Resources Office, nor the POD EEO Office provided alternative
   options to placing her on leave without pay (LWOP) to help mitigate
   issues of changing her health insurance; and,

   7. On or about October 29, 2021, the Lieutenant Colonel of the
   USACE Honolulu District notified her that he issued a forced directive
   for her curtailment back to USACE Fort Worth District.

The Agency accepted the claims and conducted an investigation which
produced the following evidence.
                                     3                          2022003249

Complainant stated that she suffers from anxiety and depression which
resulted in her developing post-traumatic stress disorder. She also stated
that she has debilitating GERD and low vision. She wears “medically
necessary contact lenses” for her low vision. She further stated that her
medical     conditions  impact   “eating,   sleeping,  speaking,   reading,
concentration, thinking, communicating, moods, muscle aches, digestive
system, memory loss, headaches, and PTSD.” Complainant noted that she
exhausted her annual and sick leave while assigned to Hawaii, which placed
her in a leave without pay (LWOP) status. In response to questions about
the claims at issue, Complainant stated, “Unable to answer due to a medical
reason for a diagnosed medical condition covered under the American with
Disabilities Act and documented within the Equal Employment Opportunity
Offices.”

The Agency’s EEO Manager stated he was the EEO Counselor assigned to
Complainant for her reasonable accommodation (RA) request on August 24,
2021. He also stated he was aware that Complainant has anxiety and
depression, and he asked Complainant to tell him what limitations she had,
but she stated she was busy working on her response to an Army Regulation
(AR) 15-6 investigation. The EEO Manager noted that he never received
anything from Complainant. He learned of her limitations (mental disability)
from the POD EEO Manager. He stated that Complainant’s doctor placed her
on medical leave, and he extended the length of the leave. The EEO
Manager also stated management mentioned that Complainant was not
performing her duties because she was not able to work due to her extended
medical leave. He noted that on August 24, 2021, Complainant requested a
RA of reassignment to a different contracting office from the investigating
officer. The request was forwarded to him on August 30, 2021. Complainant
requested monitors and management accommodated the request by
providing two 27-inch monitors and two 26-inch monitors. Management also
provided leave flexibility (paid and unpaid).

The Lieutenant Colonel (race-Asian/Korean; color-light brown; sex-male)
stated that since May 2021, he has been the Deputy Chief of Contracting,
Honolulu District. He also stated he was Complainant’s first level supervisor
beginning on/about August/September 2021, until Complainant departed in
December 2021. He further stated that he became aware of Complainant’s
participation in protected EEO activity and her vision impairment on/about
June/July 2021. He also became aware of Complainant’s anxiety around
August/September 2021 from the Office of Counsel.
                                      4                          2022003249

On September 29, 2021, the Lieutenant Colonel spoke to Complainant for
the first time by phone to express concern about her having gone to the
emergency room. The call lasted for two-hours, with Complainant making
repeated accusations against everyone in the organization (including the
Lieutenant Colonel). The Lieutenant Colonel stated that he asked
Complainant more than ten times to cease name-calling and making
accusations, but she continued to do so until she abruptly hung up the
phone. He noted that Complainant did not want to be in the presence of her
peers and supervisor, so she could not physically show up at the office.

Complainant provided medical documentation stating that she has anxiety
and depression and she requested days off due to her condition. The
Lieutenant Colonel stated the organization permitted Complainant to take
annual and sick leave and LWOP. He also stated that during the time he was
there, Complainant only reported for work less than 10 days. He further
stated she occupied a Contract Specialist, GS-12 position, which is a critical
position. Based on Complainant’s lack of performance and completed work,
the Lieutenant Colonel noted that he could not accurately assess whether
Complainant was qualified to perform the essential functions of her position.

The Lieutenant Colonel stated that when Complainant submitted her
harassment claim, an investigator was appointed to investigate. After the
interview with Complainant, the investigator asked the EEO Office to look
into a potential RA for Complainant. Subsequently, a meeting was held
between the Lieutenant Colonel, the EEO Manager, and Office of Counsel and
it was decided that without proper documentation/justification, a decision
could not be made on Complainant’s request for reassignment. He also
stated, “we realized that it was logistically impossible for us to move her;
there were no other vacant 1102 positions within our organization that she
could be transferred to.” The Lieutenant Colonel further stated there are two
contracting branches in the division and Complainant did not want to work in
either branch. However, after a few weeks, he eventually became
Complainant’s new supervisor. The Lieutenant Colonel noted Complainant
told him that she did not trust him and did not want to work for him.
Complainant never reported to the office after the Lieutenant Colonel
became her supervisor, claiming that she had medical issues/complications.
                                     5                         2022003249

Claim 1: Beginning in June 2021, the following office and/or
individuals   have    denied   her   request(s)   for   reasonable
accommodation: the Honolulu District (POH) Contracting Office; the
Pacific Ocean Division (POD) EEO Manager; the Pacific Ocean Alaska
(POA) District EEO Specialist; the Captain, and the CEHEC-EO EEO
Specialist.

The Agency explained that in response to Complainant’s low vision
impairment, she was provided four large screen monitors. Complainant had
requested 26-inch monitors and was provided 27-inch monitors.
Complainant was not satisfied with the monitors, so the Supervisory
Contract Specialist (race-Native Hawaiian/Japanese/Caucasian; color-brown;
sex-female) told her she would look into the matter. However, Complainant
did not return to work after October 15, 2021. Although Complainant had
expressed dissatisfaction with the RA, she failed to modify her request or
engage in the interactive process with management so that an alternative
accommodation could be considered/provided.

The Agency further explained that in response to Complainant’s
anxiety/depression, she was permitted to take all of her annual and sick
leave, was granted LWOP, was informed about the leave donor program, and
was given a different supervisor. Nevertheless, even after being given a new
supervisor, Complainant failed to return to work on a regular basis. Rather,
Complainant wanted to be moved out of her organization. However, the
Agency noted that Complainant’s organization was the only one where
contract specialists were assigned.

Claim 2: As recently as July 2021, she was overly criticized by a co-
worker.

The Acting District Contracting Chief (POH) and Senior Procurement Analyst
(race-American/Asian; color-info not provided; sex-male; no prior EEO
activity) disagreed with the assertion, stating that the only thing he heard
was an assessment by a supervisor stating that Complainant’s work product
was not good. He stated that he is not aware of any harassment in the office
and noted that Complainant was seldom in the office. Therefore, most of the
communication with her was by e-mail.
                                      6                           2022003249

Claim 3: In July 2021, she was singled out and excluded from
performing an important job function, specifically attending a site
visit.

The Acting District Contracting Chief (POH) stated that he is unaware of
Complainant being singled out and stated that site visits are strictly assigned
based on “availability” of the Contracting Officer/Specialist. The Agency also
noted that because Complainant began her extended absences on July 19,
2021, it is reasonable that management would have decided not to send
Complainant to a site visit based on her unavailability.

Claim 4: In July 2021, she was singled out and excluded from
attending a lunch celebrating a co-worker’s birthday hosted by the
Lieutenant Colonel.

Both the Lieutenant Colonel and Acting District Contracting Chief (POH)
noted that Complainant was personally invited to the luncheon but she
declined the invitation.

Claim 5: On or about August 25, 2021, the POD and/or POA EEO
Office and the POH Contracting Management Team denied her
request for mediation.

The Agency noted the Commission holds that the decision to offer
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) or mediation is discretionary. Agencies
have discretion to determine whether a given dispute is appropriate for ADR.
Agencies may decide on a case-by-case basis whether it is appropriate to
offer ADR. Therefore, Complainant cannot show that the denial of her
request for mediation is discriminatory.

Claim 6: On or about October 1, 2021, the POH Contracting Team,
the POH Human Resources Office, nor the POD EEO Office provided
alternative options to placing her on leave without pay (LWOP) to
help mitigate issues of changing her health insurance.

The Supervisory Contract Specialist stated that she informed Complainant
about FMLA, the leave transfer program and information about Federal
benefits. She also issued a memorandum to Complainant dated October 12,
2021, wherein she addresses FMLA, Federal Benefits Open Season, and the
Voluntary Leave Transfer Program. The Agency maintained that
management cannot be found liable for Complainant’s loss of benefits when
Agency guidelines mandate such loss.
                                       7                          2022003249

Further, management cannot be found liable for Complainant’s failure to
pursue available options (i.e., voluntary leave donor program) which
potentially could prolong her receipt of benefits.

Claim 7: On or about October 29, 2021, the Lieutenant Colonel of the
USACE Honolulu District notified her that he issued a forced directive
for her curtailment back to USACE Fort Worth District.

The Lieutenant Colonel of USACE (POH) stated he notified Complainant that
he had issued a forced directive for her curtailment back to USACE Fort
Worth District. Specifically, Complainant’s overseas tour was curtailed
because she was experiencing health issues, was not able to make rent
(housing) payments, was unable to adapt to the overseas area, integrate
into the organization and fulfill her professional obligations. The Lieutenant
Colonel also stated that Complainant needed to return to her base of family
support in Fort Worth. He noted that the Joint Travel Regulation provided
authorization to send Complainant home at District/Government expense
and in the employee’s best interest. The forced directive memorandum
stated that the decision is final and that it is non-disciplinary and is not an
adverse action subject to further administrative review. The Lieutenant
Colonel placed Complainant on paid administrative leave until her departure
from Honolulu.

At the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant was provided with a copy
of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request either a final
agency decision or a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ).
Complainant requested a final agency decision. Subsequently, the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision
concluded that Complainant failed to demonstrate that the alleged examples
of unwelcome conduct constituted unlawful harassment. Complainant
specifically failed to produce preponderant evidence that the alleged
incidents were motivated by her membership in a protected class.
Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant mainly reargues the merits of many of her claims. The Agency
asks that we affirm its final decision.
                                     8                          2022003249

                          STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, §
VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS

Denied Reasonable Accommodation

An agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known
physical and mental limitations of an individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29
C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p). In order to establish that she was denied a
reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: (1) she is an
individual with a disability as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) she is
“qualified” as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed
to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance
on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation),
No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002).

“The term ‘qualified,’ with respect to an individual with a disability, means
that the individual satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education and
other job-related requirements of the employment position such individual
holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can
perform the essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).
The term “position” is not limited to the position held by the employee but
may also include positions that the employee could have held as a result of
reassignment. Therefore, in determining whether an employee is “qualified,”
an agency must look beyond the position which the employee presently
encumbers. Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation.
                                       9                          2022003249

Here, while the record reflects that she suffers from a disability
(Anxiety/Depression/Low Vision), Complainant was arguably not qualified for
the position she held. Specifically, the record reflects that Complainant failed
to carry out the duties of her position as a contract specialist. Complainant’s
supervisor stated that during the time he was there, Complainant only
reported for work less than 10 days. The Lieutenant Colonel further stated
that based on Complainant’s lack of performance and completed work, he
could not accurately assess whether Complainant was qualified to perform
the essential functions of her position. Moreover, Complainant has not shown
that the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. The record
evidence shows that in response to Complainant’s low vision impairment,
she was provided four large screen monitors. Complainant had requested
26-inch monitors and was provided 27-inch monitors. Complainant was not
satisfied with the monitors, so the Supervisory Contract Specialist told her
she would look into the matter. However, Complainant did not return to
work after October 15, 2021. Although Complainant had expressed
dissatisfaction with the RA, she failed to modify her request or engage in the
interactive process with management so that an alternative accommodation
could be considered/provided. The Agency explained that in response to
Complainant’s anxiety/depression, she was permitted to take all of her
annual and sick leave, was granted LWOP, was informed about the leave
donor program, and was given a different supervisor. Nevertheless, even
after being given a new supervisor, Complainant failed to return to work on
a regular basis. The record indicates that Complainant was not denied
reasonable accommodation. We find the Agency acted responsibly and there
is no evidence that the Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act.

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment based on indirect evidence is examined under
the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, he or she must first
establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that
a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters,
438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t. of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
                                      10                          2022003249

Once the Agency has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate
responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence
that the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor
Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

To establish a prima facie case of disparate treatment discrimination based
on disability, a complainant generally must prove the following elements: (1)
they are an individual with a disability as defined in 29 C.F.R. §§
1614.203(a) and 1630.2(g); (2) they are “qualified” as defined in 29 C.F.R.
§§1614.203(a) and 1630.2(m); (3) the agency took an adverse action
against them; and (4) there was a causal relationship between their
disability and the agency’s actions. See Annamarie F. v. Department of the
Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 2021004539 (August 17, 2023). As noted above,
Complainant was arguably not a qualified individual with a disability, and she
fails to establish any causal relationship between her disabilities and the
Agency’s actions.

In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on color, race
or sex, a complainant may show: (1) that she is a member of a protected
group; (2) that she was subjected to an adverse employment action; and
(3) that she was treated less favorably than other similarly situated
employees outside of her protected group. We note that it is not necessary
for a complainant to rely strictly on comparative evidence in order to
establish an inference of discriminatory motivation necessary to support a
prima facie case. O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., 517 U.S.
308, 312 (1996); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on O'Connor v. Consolidated
Coin Caterers Corp., EEOC Notice No. 915.002, n. 4 (September 18, 1996).

Here, Complainant has not established a prima facie case of color, race or
sex discrimination. Complainant cannot show that employees outside of her
protected classes were treated differently than she was under similar
circumstances. Complainant has provided no credible indicator that her
color, race or sex served as a factor in management’s actions in this matter.

Complainant can establish a prima facie case of reprisal by showing that: (1)
Complainant engaged in protected activity; (2) the Agency was aware of the
protected activity; (3) subsequently, Complainant was subjected to adverse
treatment by the Agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected
activity and the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Department of the Air Force,
EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (September 25, 2000).
                                      11                          2022003249

In general, a complainant can demonstrate a causal connection using
temporal proximity when the separation between the employer's knowledge
of the protected activity and the adverse action is very close. See Clark
County School District v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268 (2001) (holding that a
three-month period was not proximate enough to establish a causal nexus).
Complainant can also establish a prima facie case of reprisal by presenting
facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of
discrimination. Shapiro v. Social Security Admin., EEOC Request No.
05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996) (citing McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802). Here,
while the Lieutenant Colonel acknowledged that he was aware of
Complainant’s prior EEO matter, the record does not show a nexus between
Complainant’s prior EEO activity and her current claims. Because
Complainant’s primary supervisor, the Lieutenant Colonel, was not a
responsible management official in the prior EEO matter and discriminatory
animus is absent from the record, we find that Complainant has failed to
establish a prima facie case based on reprisal.

Concerning Complainant’s various claims, the Agency has provided
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons (above) for its actions. The record
reflects that the Lieutenant Colonel and other managers provided either
constructive feedback or direction regarding Complainant’s work, Agency
policy and Office structure. Notably, Complainant’s continued inability to
return to her job and carry out the expected duties of her position ultimately
resulted in the curtailment of her overseas position. Complainant fails to
show that the Agency’s reasons for its actions are pretext for unlawful
discrimination.

Hostile Work Environment

To prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was
subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a
“reasonable person” in Complainant’s position would have found the conduct
to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was
taken because of a protected basis – in this case, her color, race, disability,
sex or prior EEO activity. Only if Complainant establishes both of those
elements – hostility and motive – will the question of Agency liability present
itself. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris
v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also, Enforcement
Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace, EEOC Notice No. 915.064 (April
29, 2024).
                                     12                          2022003249

Furthermore, an employer is subject to vicarious liability for harassment
when it is created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher)
authority over the employee. See Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524
U.S. 742, 118 S.Ct. 2257, 2270 (1998); Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524
U.S. 775, 118 S.Ct. 2275, 2292-93 (1998). However, where the harassment
does not result in a tangible employment action (e.g., a discharge,
demotion, or undesirable reassignment) the employer can raise an
affirmative defense, which is subject to proof by a preponderance of the
evidence, by demonstrating that it exercised reasonable care to prevent and
correct promptly any harassing behavior; and the employee unreasonably
failed to take advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities
provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise. See Burlington
Industries, supra; Faragher, supra; Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in
the Workplace (Supervisor – Vicarious Liability), EEOC Notice No. 915.064
(April 29, 2024).

In order to establish a prima facie case of color, race, disability, sex or
reprisal harassment, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, the existence of five elements: (1) that they are a member of a
statutorily protected class; (2) that they were subjected to unwelcome
conduct related to their class; (3) that the harassment complained of was
based on their class; (4) that the harassment had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with their work performance and/or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) that there is a
basis for imputing liability to the employer. Celine B. v. Dep’t of Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 2019001961 (Sept. 21, 2020).

While Complainant meets prong (1) concerning her color, race, disability and
sex of the prima facie case outlined above, and has prior EEO activity, she
cannot meet any of the remaining prongs, (2)-(5). The Agency correctly
concluded that the record does not contain evidentiary support for any
alleged harassment of Complainant because of a protected category. Agency
actions in this matter do not evince an unlawful motive, and Complainant
has not produced evidence to support that responsible management officials
were motivated by discriminatory animus. Moreover, drawing all inferences
in favor of Complainant, and whether analyzed individually or taken
collectively, Complainant cannot establish a prima facie case of harassment.
Complainant’s allegations of harassment are based on either legitimate,
nondiscriminatory management decisions, Agency policy, or constitute
nothing more than ordinary workplace occurrences. Beyond repeated
conjecture, Complainant has not shown that she was subjected to a hostile
work environment based upon her claimed bases.
                                      13                          2022003249

In sum, the preponderance of the evidence does not establish that
management was motivated by discriminatory animus. Also, again, we find
the Agency acted responsibly and there is no evidence that the Agency
violated the Rehabilitation Act.

                                CONCLUSION

After a review of the record in its entirety, including consideration of all
statements submitted on appeal, it is the decision of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission to affirm the Agency’s final decision because the
preponderance of the evidence of record does not establish that
discrimination occurred.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                       14                          2022003249

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs.
                                      15                          2022003249

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil
action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must
submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the
sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do
not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph
titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s si
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 24, 2024
Date
