           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Elene K, 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                            Denis R. McDonough,
                                 Secretary,
                       Department of Veterans Affairs
                      (Veterans Health Administration),
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2022003187


                     Agency No. 200I-VI07-2020105309

                                  DECISION

On May 11, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a), from the Agency’s April 27, 2022 final decision concerning her
equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq., and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, we AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                             ISSUES PRESENTED

The issue presented before the Commission is whether Complainant has
proven that the Agency subjected her to discrimination and/or harassment
based on her age, color, disability, national origin and religion.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                            2022003187

                                 BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Human Resource (HR) Assistant, GS-5, at the VA Medical Center in Augusta,
Georgia, from September 29, 2019 to May 21, 2020, when she involuntarily
resigned in lieu of termination.

On November 20, 2020, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that
the Agency subjected her to hostile workplace discrimination on the bases of
national origin (German/American), religion (Christian), color (Fair),
disability (Fibromyalgia), and age. In support of her claim, Complainant
raised the following allegations:

  1. On unspecified dates, Complainant’s first level supervisor, Supervisory
     Human Resources Specialist (“HR Supervisor”), requested that
     Complainant sign as the witness on documents she did not witness.

  2. On unspecified     dates,    HR    Supervisor    purportedly    threatened
     Complainant.

  3. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor made degrading statements such
     as “this job is not for you” or “speed it up” when Complainant would
     ask questions.

  4. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor disrespectfully hollered and
     screamed at Complainant in front of others.

  5. On unspecified    dates,    HR    Supervisor    would   not   apologize   to
     Complainant.

  6. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor did not provide “just” training to
     Complainant.

  7. On an unspecified date, HR Supervisor referred to Complainant as “off
     the street.”

  8. In March 2020, HR Supervisor increased Complainant’s workload.

  9. From November 2019 to May 21, 2020, management denied and failed
     to provide a reasonable accommodation to Complainant.
                                         3                            2022003187

   10. On May 21, 2020,            Complainant    was    terminated    during   her
   probationary period. 2

The Agency accepted the claims and conducted an investigation which
produced the following evidence.

Complainant stated that she applied for the position of HR Assistant under
Schedule A eligibility as a disabled employee. Complainant identified her
disability as Fibromyalgia, which was diagnosed in 1996. She stated that her
disability limits her ability to work out, sit, stand, and walk, lift over a certain
amount, and use computers because of the lighting and glare. According to
Complainant, she had work restrictions which required her not to lift heavy
objects, or to sit, stand, or walk for long periods. Complainant takes
Ibuprofen and Tylenol for her medical condition, and these medications
sometimes cause swelling, rash, and itching.

Complainant stated that she requested an ergonomic chair, footrest, and a
screen glare protector. However, she also stated that she did not receive a
response from management.

During the supplemental investigation, Complainant submitted medical
documentation from her physician in Tucson, Arizona, dated June 15, 2005,
substantiating that she has been diagnosed with Fibromyalgia.
Complainant’s doctor stated that Complainant has difficulty with her grip
secondary to arthralgias and has difficulty with prolonged standing, sitting,
or walking. Complainant’s doctor’s report stated that Complainant had a ten-
pound lifting limitation and noted that Complainant suffers from chronic
pain. To alleviate her symptoms, Complainant has been prescribed ultracet,
tetracycline, and naproxen for her condition. In a letter dated May 16, 2005,
Complainant’s doctor opined that Complainant “is not able to perform any
kind of work at this time because of the condition and severity of pain and
swelling.” Documentation provided by Complainant’s doctor dated June 20,
2005, described Complainant’s restrictions as inability to lift, inability to
participate in fine motor movements, hand gripping, repetitive activities,
writing, and/or typing.




2 The Agency noted in its final decision that modifications were made to the

accepted claims in accordance with the information provided during the
investigations. Any additional claims are addressed in our decision in the
Analysis section below.
                                     4                          2022003187

With respect to Complainant’s ability to work in the future, Complainant’s
doctor stated that this would depend on her progress and her response to
treatment over the next three or four months. He recommended that
Complainant be evaluated by a pain clinic.

Claim 1: On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor requested that
Complainant sign as the witness on documents she did not witness.

HR Supervisor (Medium Brown, African American, Christian) stated that VA
guidelines do not require in-person verification of 1-9 forms or
administration of the Oath of Office. According to HR Supervisor, due to
procedural changes related to COVID-19, new hires uploaded driver’s
licenses, social security cards and passports to the USAStaffing program and
then electronically signed l-9 and SF61 forms. HR Assistants were assigned
to review the uploaded documents and sign electronically. On a rotating
basis, HR Assistants physically attended the new hires’ orientation and
compared their documents against what had been uploaded to the system
and reported back to the corresponding HR Assistant that the new hire was
in possession of the relevant documents. After Complainant told her that she
was not certain if co-workers who physically viewed the documents were
providing accurate information, HR Supervisor told Complainant that it was
her responsibility to complete the onboarding of new hires and ensure all the
information was accurate.

Claims:

      2. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor purportedly threatened
         Complainant.

      3. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor made degrading
         statements such as “this job is not for you” or “speed it up”
         when Complainant would ask questions.

      4. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor disrespectfully hollered
         and screamed at Complainant in front of others.

      5. On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor would not apologize to
         Complainant.

     7. On an unspecified date,            HR    Supervisor    referred   to
     Complainant as “off the street.”
                                      5                          2022003187

HR Supervisor denied telling Complainant that “this job is not for you” or to
“speed it up.” She denied refusing to answer Complainant’s questions or
hollering and screaming at Complainant on multiple occasions. HR
Supervisor recalled elevating her voice on only one occasion when she asked
Complainant why a new hire recruitment packet had the same mistakes that
she had brought to Complainant’s attention the day before on March 19,
2020, when she met with Complainant to discuss continuing errors,
complaints, and work product issues with recruitment files. According to HR
Supervisor, Complainant submitted a recruitment packet with duplicate
documents, incorrect documents, and non-related information. When she
asked Complainant why she presented a package with the same errors that
they had discussed, Complainant loudly responded that she was never told
to do “that.” HR Supervisor stated that she matched Complainant’s elevated
tone and insisted that she did tell Complainant how to organize the
recruitment package. Complainant’s voice grew louder; HR Supervisor
instructed Complainant to correct the file and HR Supervisor walked away.
HR Supervisor stated that her voice was not loudest of the two of them.
Complainant did not ask for an apology and HR Supervisor did not offer one.

According to HR Supervisor, when multiple people were around, Complainant
had a tendency to become loud and contradictory. She stated that all staff
were provided feedback on errors at team meetings, not individually, as a
reminder that “Time to Hire” errors were critical elements on employees’
performance standards. HR Supervisor explained that most errors were
sequence errors, when a Specialist or Assistant performs HR actions out of
order. She further explained that an example of a sequence error would be
sending a tentative job offer before a SF-52 personnel action is received. HR
Supervisor recalled another common error is not following the correct
procedure for the verification of background investigation dates for new hires
who did not require new background checks.

HR Supervisor explained that the phrase “off the street” was used during
training to describe when a new hire required a full background
investigation. Staff needed to determine the onboarding required for
different types of new hires, who might be internal facility transfers, VA
transfers, reinstated employees or new federal employees. HR Supervisor
denied using this term with respect to Complainant; the term was used to
describe new hires who needed a background investigation, if they were off
the street, versus a transfer from another agency, who did not need a
background investigation.
                                      6                           2022003187

Claim 6: On unspecified dates, HR Supervisor did not provide “just”
training to Complainant.

HR Supervisor explained that six new HR Assistants were hired for the
section supervised by herself and the Lead HR Specialist. Complainant and
one of the other supervisor’s selectees were the first of the six to start. The
systems in HR have several programs and data bases (EOPF, HRSMART,
USASTAFFING) in which access must be approved and training completed
before access is given. HR Supervisor stated that she organized formal
training to ensure that all the new Assistants received the same training.
She created books with instructions, guidelines, and arranged for Senior
Assistants to provide demonstrations. According to HR Supervisor, the
instruction included hands-on training, visual aids, and tests to measure
understanding. The formal training lasted a week. She noted that
Complainant received more than adequate training comparable to her peers;
Complainant received additional one-on-one training from herself and a
Senior Assistant. During employee orientation, Human Resources
Information Systems (HRIS) provided Complainant with links to required
training. HR Supervisor stated that Complainant was hired on September 29,
2019, and on October 10, 2019, forms verifying Complainant’s need to
access certain HR electronic programs and databases were sent to the
Human Resources Officer. On October 21, 2019, Complainant reported that
she had completed the training and the following day HRIS granted
Complainant access to the programs and databases required to perform her
job duties. On October 28, 2019, Complainant was instructed to complete
eight USAStaffing modules to gain access to the USAStaffing Program. HR
Supervisor received Complainant’s completion certificate on November 6,
2019.

Claim 8: In March 2020, HR Supervisor increased Complainant’s
workload.

HR Supervisor stated that she was responsible for assigning work to
Complainant. She noted that during this time period, Complainant’s
workload increased because she was assigned to Fiscal, Engineering,
Pathology and Lab, Prosthetics, IT, Safety, and Volunteer Services, and
there was an increase in HR actions for these services as the Medical
Director approved vacancies in these services. HR Supervisor identified other
HR Assistants with Complainant’s position title, who also experienced an
increase in their workload.
                                     7                         2022003187

Claim 9: From November 2019 to May 21, 2020, management denied
and failed to provide a reasonable accommodation to Complainant.

HR Supervisor stated that she was aware that the Georgia Vocational
Rehabilitation Agency was scheduled to conduct an ergonomic assessment,
but she never received any medical documentation in reference to
Complainant’s medical condition, she had no knowledge of any work
limitations, she was not aware that Complainant had requested reasonable
accommodation, and she was not aware that Complainant asked for an
ergonomic chair, footrest, or a screen glare protector. HR Supervisor
recalled that Complainant was working with an outside company to get an
ergonomic assessment and that Complainant inquired whether the company
could come to the VA to complete the assessment. According to S1, she sent
Complainant to Employee Labor Relations to learn whether Complainant’s
request was permissible. She did not send Complainant to the Local
Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator (“RA Coordinator”), nor does she
recall discussing Complainant’s reasonable accommodation requests with the
Assistive Work Technology Team of the Georgia Vocational Rehabilitation
Agency.

Complainant’s second line supervisor, the Human Resources Officer (“HR
Officer,” Black, African American, Methodist), stated that she was not aware
of Complainant’s medical condition or impairment, work restrictions, or that
she had requested accommodation. She stated that Complainant’s
supervisor should have had knowledge of Complainant’s request as she was
the Deciding Management Official (DMO) for reasonable accommodation
requests.

RA Coordinator stated that she was unaware of Complainant’s medical
condition or work limitations, she did not have a record of receiving the
written confirmation of Complainant’s request for accommodation or any
other paperwork requesting accommodation for Complainant, nor did she
ever receive medical documentation indicating that Complainant had a
disability. She stated that she did not have a conversation around December
2019, January 2020 concerning Complainant’s request for ergonomic
equipment. According to RA Coordinator, she did not have any contact with
the Georgia Vocational Rehabilitation Agency, and she did not receive the
ergonomic assessment and recommendations. She denied telling
Complainant that the equipment had been received but then issued to
another employee.
                                       8                          2022003187

RA Coordinator stated that due to her lack of knowledge that Complainant
was requesting an accommodation, she never proceeded with having an
interactive meeting with Complainant and her supervisor to make a decision
with regard to a reasonable accommodation, and she did not order the
requested equipment.

An EEO Specialist and ADR Coordinator, who assists RA Coordinator with
accommodation requests stated that there is no record of a reasonable
accommodation on file for Complainant. The current RA Coordinator at the
Augusta VAMC stated that he has no record of Complainant requesting a
reasonable accommodation.

Claim 10: On May 21, 2020, Complainant was terminated during her
probationary period.

On February 25, 2020, HR Supervisor met with Complainant to discuss her
performance. HR Supervisor discussed delays in the hiring process because
Complainant was unable to distinguish which selectees needed to go through
VetPro, needed physicals, and required background checks. Complainant
was reminded that onboarding made up at least 80 percent of Complainant’s
performance standards and it was Complainant’s responsibility to ensure
that onboarding was timely, and that New Hire Packets follow a standard
format. With respect to Complainant’s refusal to complete the 1-9 form
because she could not be sure that the information that she was given was
accurate, Complainant was told that it was her responsibility to ensure that
the information was accurate.

In a letter dated May 20, 2020, HR Officer notified Complainant that she
would be terminated during her probationary period. She was informed that
HR Supervisor (the Supervisor of Recruitment and Placement) had
recommended that she be terminated from her position because
Complainant failed to comprehend the complexity of the work, which
resulted in delays in the onboarding and hiring process. After receiving this
letter, Complainant elected to involuntarily resign because she could not
work with HR Supervisor.

At the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant was provided with a copy
of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request either a final
agency decision or a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ).
Complainant requested a final agency decision Subsequently, the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
                                     9                          2022003187

The decision concluded that Complainant failed to demonstrate that the
alleged examples of unwelcome conduct constituted unlawful harassment.
Complainant specifically failed to produce preponderant evidence that the
alleged incidents were motivated by her membership in a protected class.
Complainant filed the instant appeal.

                         CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant mainly reargues the merits of many of her claims. The Agency
asks that we affirm its final decision.

                          STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, §
VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS

Denied Reasonable Accommodation

An agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known
physical and mental limitations of an individual with a disability unless the
agency can show that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. 29
C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p). In order to establish that she was denied a
reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: (1) she is an
individual with a disability as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) she is
“qualified” as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed
to provide a reasonable accommodation. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance
on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation),
No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002).
                                      10                          2022003187

“The term ‘qualified,’ with respect to an individual with a disability, means
that the individual satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education and
other job-related requirements of the employment position such individual
holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can
perform the essential functions of such position.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m).
The term “position” is not limited to the position held by the employee but
may also include positions that the employee could have held as a result of
reassignment. Therefore, in determining whether an employee is “qualified,”
an agency must look beyond the position which the employee presently
encumbers. Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation.

Here, while the record reflects that she suffers from a disability
(Fibromyalgia), Complainant was arguably not qualified for the position she
held. Specifically, the record reflects that Complainant failed to carry out the
duties of her position as an HR Assistant. HR Supervisor stated that
Complainant’s continued inability to meet the requirements of her job
ultimately resulted in her recommended termination during Complainant’s
probationary period. Further, Complainant has not shown that the Agency
failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. The record evidence shows
that Complainant never informed her management of a disability warranting
a reasonable accommodation. The record indicates Complainant was not
denied a reasonable accommodation as there is no evidence supporting
Complainant's assertion that she requested an accommodation, including no
clear medical documentation supporting an accommodation request. We find
no evidence that the Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act.

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment based on indirect evidence is examined under
the three-part analysis first enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, he or she must first
establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that
a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action.
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters,
438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t. of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the Agency has met its
burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact
finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency acted on the
basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502
(1993).
                                      11                          2022003187

To establish a prima facie case of disparate treatment discrimination based
on disability, a complainant generally must prove the following elements: (1)
they are an individual with a disability as defined in 29 C.F.R. §§
1614.203(a) and 1630.2(g); (2) they are “qualified” as defined in 29 C.F.R.
§§1614.203(a) and 1630.2(m); (3) the agency took an adverse action
against them; and (4) there was a causal relationship between their
disability and the agency’s actions. See Annamarie F. v. Department of the
Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 2021004539 (August 17, 2023). As noted above,
Complainant was arguably not a qualified individual with a disability, and she
fails to establish any causal relationship between her disability and the
Agency’s actions.

In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on age, color,
national origin or religion, a complainant may show: (1) that she is a
member of a protected group; (2) that she was subjected to an adverse
employment action; and (3) that she was treated less favorably than other
similarly situated employees outside of her protected group. We note that it
is not necessary for a complainant to rely strictly on comparative evidence in
order to establish an inference of discriminatory motivation necessary to
support a prima facie case. O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp.,
517 U.S. 308, 312 (1996); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on O'Connor v.
Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., EEOC Notice No. 915.002, n. 4
(September 18, 1996).

Here, Complainant has not established a prima facie case of age, color,
national origin or religion discrimination. Complainant cannot show that
employees outside of her protected classes were treated differently than she
was under similar circumstances. Complainant has provided no credible
indicator that her age, color, national origin or religion served as a factor in
management’s actions in this matter.

Concerning Complainant’s various claims, the Agency has provided
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons (above) for its actions. The record
reflects that HR Supervisor provided either constructive feedback or direction
regarding Complainant’s work and Office structure. Notably, Complainant’s
continued inability to carry out the expected duties of her position resulted in
HR Supervisor’s recommendation for Complainant’s removal. Complainant
fails to show that the Agency’s reasons for its actions are pretext for
unlawful discrimination.
                                      12                          2022003187

Constructive Discharge

The Commission has established three elements which a complainant must
prove to substantiate a claim of constructive discharge: (1) a reasonable
person in the complainant's position would have found the working
conditions intolerable; (2) conduct that constituted discrimination against
the complainant created the intolerable working conditions; and (3) the
complainant's involuntary resignation resulted from the intolerable working
conditions. See Walch v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Request No. 05940688 (Apr.
13, 1995). Here, because again, management has provided legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, Complainant cannot establish that
she was subjected to discriminatory behavior that made her working
conditions so difficult that any reasonable person in her position would feel
compelled to resign.

Hostile Work Environment

To prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was
subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a
“reasonable person” in Complainant’s position would have found the conduct
to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was
taken because of a protected basis – in this case, her age, color, disability,
national origin or religion. Only if Complainant establishes both of those
elements – hostility and motive – will the question of Agency liability present
itself. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris
v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also, Enforcement
Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace, EEOC Notice No. 915.064 (April
29, 2024).

Furthermore, an employer is subject to vicarious liability for harassment
when it is created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher)
authority over the employee. See Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524
U.S. 742, 118 S.Ct. 2257, 2270 (1998); Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524
U.S. 775, 118 S.Ct. 2275, 2292-93 (1998). However, where the harassment
does not result in a tangible employment action (e.g., a discharge,
demotion, or undesirable reassignment) the employer can raise an
affirmative defense, which is subject to proof by a preponderance of the
evidence, by demonstrating that it exercised reasonable care to prevent and
correct promptly any harassing behavior; and the employee unreasonably
failed to take advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities
provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise.
                                     13                          2022003187

See Burlington Industries, supra; Faragher, supra; Enforcement Guidance on
Harassment in the Workplace (Supervisor – Vicarious Liability), EEOC Notice
No. 915.064 (April 29, 2024).

In order to establish a prima facie case of age, color, disability, national
origin or religion harassment, a complainant must prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, the existence of five elements: (1) that they
are a member of a statutorily protected class; (2) that they were subjected
to unwelcome conduct related to their class; (3) that the harassment
complained of was based on their class; (4) that the harassment had the
purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with their work performance
and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
(5) that there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. Celine B. v.
Dep’t of Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001961 (Sept. 21, 2020).

While Complainant meets prong (1) concerning her age, color, disability,
national origin and religion of the prima facie case outlined above, she
cannot meet any of the remaining prongs, (2)-(5). As the Agency noted in
its final decision:

   Complainant alleges that the harassment was based on her age
   because comments like “speed it up” referenced her age in a
   stereotyping and harassing manner. She claims that she was
   harassed on the basis of her disability because her symptoms from
   sitting too long were not addressed and she was blamed for the
   mistakes of others. Complainant claims that when she asked for
   assistance with her disability, [HR Supervisor’s] response was “uh oh”
   and her treatment began to get worse. According to Complainant, she
   was treated differently after management learned about her mixed
   nationalities and because she was the fairest employee in the group.
   Complainant alleges that her religion was a factor because she
   strived for perfection in her duties, as she believed the Lord desired
   and taught in the Bible. [However,] Complainant’s belief that
   management’s decisions may be based on discriminatory factors does
   not transform those decisions into unlawful harassment. Apart from
   Complainant’s bare assertions, the record contains no evidence that
   the incidents and interactions Complainant raised in her complaint
   were motivated by her color, national origin, religion, disability,
   and/or age.
                                      14                          2022003187

Here, the Agency correctly concluded that the record does not contain
evidentiary support for any alleged harassment of Complainant because of a
protected category. Agency actions in this matter do not evince an unlawful
motive, and Complainant has not produced evidence to support that
responsible management officials were motivated by discriminatory animus.
Moreover, drawing all inferences in favor of Complainant, and whether
analyzed individually or taken collectively, Complainant cannot establish a
prima facie case of harassment. Complainant’s allegations of harassment are
based on either legitimate, nondiscriminatory management decisions,
Agency policy, or constitute nothing more than ordinary workplace
occurrences. Beyond conjecture, Complainant has not shown that she was
subjected to a hostile work environment based upon her claimed bases.

In sum, the preponderance of the evidence does not establish that
management was motivated by discriminatory animus. Also, again, we find
no evidence that the Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act.

                                CONCLUSION

After a review of the record in its entirety, including consideration of all
statements submitted on appeal, it is the decision of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission to affirm the Agency’s final decision because the
preponderance of the evidence of record does not establish that
discrimination occurred.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration.
                                      15                          2022003187

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another
party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
                                       16                          2022003187

“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local
office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate
the administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                          __         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 23, 2024
Date
