          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                        Office of Federal Operations
                               P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                Arleen L., 1
                               Complainant,

                                     v.

                            Martin J. O'Malley,
                              Commissioner,
                      Social Security Administration,
                                 Agency.

                          Appeal No. 2022003617

                      Hearing No. 560-2022-00077X

                       Agency No. KC-21-0540-SSA

                                DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s June 13, 2022, final decision concerning her equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)   complaint   alleging     employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission MODIFIES the Agency’s final decision and
REMANDS the complaint for further action.

                            ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are whether this appeal should be dismissed, and
whether the Agency properly awarded $500.00 in compensatory damages
after finding that management officials improperly disclosed Complainant’s
confidential medical information and prior protected EEO activity.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                          2022003617


                                BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Customer Service Representative at the Agency’s District Office in Joplin,
Missouri.

On September 29, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that
the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of disability (physical),
and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity, when:

      1.    on June 22, 2021, Complainant learned of unauthorized sharing
            of her medical information and EEO activity, which was a per se
            violation of the Rehabilitation Act;
      2.    on June 22, 2021, Complainant learned of management
            maintaining confidential information on an online SharePoint
            site, including her name; medical condition; reasonable
            accommodation; prior EEO activity; and workers’ compensation
            information, where non-management employees had access to
            routinely copy and handle the information from the SharePoint
            site from December 2018, through June 22, 2021, and ongoing;
            and
      3.    on June 22, 2021, Complainant was subjected to per se reprisal
            when she learned that management maintained her confidential
            information online on a SharePoint site from December 2014
            through June 22, 2021, that included her name; medical
            condition; reasonable accommodation; prior EEO activity; and
            workers’ compensation, where non-management employees had
            access to routinely copy and handle the information. 2

The EEO investigation revealed that Complainant learned on June 22, 2021,
that management officials stored documents online containing confidential
information, such as her medical diagnoses and prior EEO complaints. She
noted that various management officials and employees on temporary detail
to the Area Director’s office had access to this information, without her
permission. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 131-2.




2 The Agency initially dismissed claim 3 for failure to state a claim but later

reversed the dismissal and addressed it in the final decision.
                                     3                         2022003617

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the ROI and notice of her right to request a hearing before an
EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but
subsequently withdrew her request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

The Agency found that Complainant did not prove discrimination or reprisal
for claim 2, but that management officials improperly disclosed
Complainant’s medical information (claim 1) and protected EEO activity
(claim 3). Specifically, a document stating that Complainant had a
reasonable accommodation request for carpal tunnel and an EEO complaint
was posted onto a SharePoint site that was accessible by non-managerial
staff. The Agency found that there was no indication that the medical
disclosure fell within an exception provided by the Americans with
Disabilities Act, and the disclosure of Complainant’s EEO activity was
reasonably likely to deter engagement in the EEO process. As part of the
remedies, the Agency awarded $500.00 in compensatory damages.

The instant appeal followed.

                         CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant challenges the $500.00 compensatory damages award and
requests $40,000.00, and she cites to Commission decisions awarding
between $3,000.00 and $40,000.00 to support her request. With her appeal,
Complainant provided a statement of her harms suffered from the Agency’s
action, such as anger; humiliation; and loss of sleep.

In response, the Agency argues that Complainant’s appeal should be
dismissed because her claims were previously decided in a prior case, EEOC
Appeal Number 2022000359. This prior complaint included a claim that
Complainant was subjected to a per se violation of the Rehabilitation Act in
or about November 2018 when management left her medical and
accommodation documentation on an office photocopy machine. During
litigation, Complainant complained that the Agency continued to violate the
Rehabilitation Act by keeping her medical documentation on a SharePoint
site. An EEOC AJ found no violation and the Commission affirmed on appeal.

Regarding claim 3, the Agency asserts that the reversal of the dismissal was
mistaken because it did not address the duplicative nature of the claim.
                                       4                          2022003617

The Agency contends, while the claims were not identically phrased, they
“unquestionably involve the same subject matter and fundamental issues,”
and are barred by the doctrine of issue preclusion (collateral estoppel).

In the alternative, the Agency requests that the Commission affirm the
$500.00 award for compensatory damages. While Complainant cited to other
cases awarding higher damages, the Agency claims that they involved actual
disclosure of confidential medical or EEO information, while in this case,
there was no evidence of actual disclosure to another employee.

Complainant opposes the Agency’s motion to dismiss her appeal.

                           STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS

Dismissal of Appeal

The Agency requests that the Commission dismiss the instant appeal based
on EEOC Appeal Number 2022000359. The regulation set forth at 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.107(a)(1) provides that an agency shall dismiss a complaint that
states the same claim that is pending before or has been decided by the
Agency or Commission. Complainant’s prior complaint included a claim
alleging a per se violation of the Rehabilitation Act for improper disclosure of
her medical documentation when she learned that it was left on a copier
machine in November 2018. However, while the subject of Complainant’s
documentation on SharePoint was mentioned, the Commission only
determined that there was no violation of the Rehabilitation Act when
Complainant’s medical documents were left in an office copier basket, and
not on the SharePoint site.
                                       5                           2022003617

Gena C. v. Social Security Administration, EEOC Appeal Nos. 2021002642 &
2022000359 (July 7, 2022), request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No.
2022004269 (January 31, 2023). We find that the claims in the instant
appeal were not decided by the Commission in Complainant’s prior case.

The Agency also asserts that the doctrine of collateral estoppel supports the
dismissal of the instant appeal. Under the doctrine of collateral estoppel,
once an issue is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, that
decision precludes re-litigation of the issue in a different cause of action. The
Commission has previously held that the doctrine of collateral estoppel is
applicable to discrimination claims. See Fitz-Gerald v. Tenn. Valley Auth.,
EEOC Request No. 05910573 (Jan. 16, 1992). Thus, issue preclusion bars
re-litigation of issues actually adjudicated and necessary to the judgment of
prior litigation between the parties. See Magallanes v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC
Request No. 05900176 (Jul. 13, 1990). However, as noted above, the
previous decisions did not actually adjudicate Complainant’s claims related
to the improper storage of documents that revealed her medical condition(s)
and protected EEO activity on the Agency’s SharePoint site. As such, we
decline to grant the Agency’s request to dismiss this appeal.

Compensatory Damages

As an initial matter, the Agency found a violation of the Rehabilitation Act
with the disclosure of Complainant’s medical documentation and protected
EEO activity in the final decision at issue. While the Agency now argues that
the instant appeal should be dismissed based on a finding of no
discrimination in an earlier EEOC decision, 3 the previous case included a
different claim related to Complainant’s medical documentation left on a
copier machine, and in this case, the Agency’s finding is for the improper
disclosure of Complainant’s confidential medical information and EEO
complaint activity on a SharePoint site. Complainant does not challenge the
Agency’s findings regarding management officials’ actions in revealing her
confidential information in SharePoint. As such, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
findings of discrimination and reprisal.




3  We find the Agency’s incorrect assertion that the claim is barred by
collateral estoppel because there has been a prior finding of no
discrimination on it to be incongruous with its decision to acknowledge that
its actions were in violation of the Rehabilitation Act and its award of
compensatory damages for the violation.
                                      6                           2022003617

The Agency ordered remedies of $500.00 in compensatory damages, and
there is no dispute that compensatory damages are warranted in this case.4
Complainant’s appeal concerns the amount. However, the Agency offered no
analysis or explanation for the award. Further, there is no indication that the
Agency gave Complainant an opportunity to submit evidence. For an award
for non-pecuniary compensatory damages, it is the complainants’ burden to
provide objective evidence in support of their claims and proof linking the
damages to the alleged discrimination. Papas v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 01930547 (Mar. 17, 1994); Mims v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 01933956 (Nov. 23, 1993). An award of non-pecuniary
compensatory damages should reflect the extent to which the agency’s
discriminatory action directly or proximately caused the harm as well as the
extent to which other factors also caused the harm. Johnson v. Dep’t of the
Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01961812 (June 18, 1998).

Evidence from a health care provider or other expert is not a mandatory
prerequisite for recovery of compensatory damages for emotional harm. See
Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01952288 (Apr. 18, 1996)
(citing Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5,
1993)). Objective evidence of compensatory damages can include
statements from complainants concerning their emotional pain or suffering,
inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to
professional standing, injury to character or reputation, injury to credit
standing, loss of health, and any other non-pecuniary losses that are
incurred as a result of the discriminatory conduct. Id.

Statements from others including family members, friends, health care
providers, other counselors (including clergy) could address the outward
manifestations or physical consequences of emotional distress, including
sleeplessness, anxiety, stress, depression, marital strain, humiliation,
emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, or a nervous
breakdown. Id. Complainants’ own testimonies, along with the
circumstances of a particular case, can suffice to sustain their burden in this
regard. Id. The more inherently degrading or humiliating the defendant’s
action is, the more reasonable it is to infer that a person would suffer
humiliation or distress from that action. Id. The absence of supporting
evidence, however, may affect the amount of damages appropriate in
specific cases. Id.

4 On appeal, the Agency offers no challenge to an award of compensatory
damages and only requests that the Commission affirm the $500.00 award
because it is fair and reasonable.
                                      7                          2022003617


There is no precise formula for determining the amount of damages for non-
pecuniary losses except that the award should reflect the nature and
severity of the harm, and the duration or expected duration of the harm.
See Loving v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29,
1997). Non-pecuniary compensatory damages are designed to remedy the
harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than to punish an agency for
the discriminatory action. Furthermore, compensatory damages should not
be motivated by passion or prejudice or be “monstrously excessive” standing
alone but should be consistent with the amounts awarded in similar cases.
See Ward-Jenkins v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01961483 (Mar.
4, 1999).

While Complainant provided a statement with her appeal regarding her
harms, we find that the Agency improperly determined an award for
compensatory damages without Complainant’s supporting evidence or
analysis of the nature, severity, and duration of her harms that is consistent
with other similar cases. As such, we VACATE the Agency’s decision
awarding $500.00 in compensatory damages and ORDER it to conduct a
supplemental investigation regarding Complainant’s claim for compensatory
damages and allow her to present evidence, including statements from a
health care provider and others with knowledge of her harms resulting from
the Agency’s discriminatory and retaliatory actions.

                                CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision finding discrimination and reprisal, and we VACATE the
compensatory damages award and ORDER the Agency take further action, in
accordance with the Order below. 5




5 The Agency’s Order has been modified to clarify the Commission’s intent
without substantively changing any of the orders. However, the order
regarding attorney’s fees has been omitted because Complainant did not
have an attorney representing her for this complaint.
                                     8                         2022003617

                                   ORDER

    1. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued,
       the Agency shall conduct and complete a supplemental investigation to
       determine whether Complainant is entitled to compensatory damages
       for this violation of the Rehabilitation Act. In so doing, the Agency
       shall:

            (a) Issue a notice to Complainant of her right to submit
               evidence based our guidance in Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy,
               EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993) and request
               evidence from Complainant in support of compensatory
               damages. 6 The Notice shall provide Complainant with thirty
               (30) calendar days to respond (with an option and
               instructions to request an extension in the case of
               extenuating circumstances). Complainant has a duty to
               cooperate with Agency’s investigation to determine
               compensatory damages, including responding to agency
               requests for documentation or completing agency forms.

            (b) Issue a new final agency decision (“Compensatory
               Damages FAD”) based on the findings of the supplemental
               investigation. The Compensatory Damages FAD shall state the
               amount (if any) of compensatory damages owed to
               Complainant and explain how the Agency determined that
               amount.     The Compensatory Damages FAD shall include
               appeal rights to the Commission.




6
  To establish entitlement to compensatory damages, the evidence must
show a causal relationship between the Agency’s discriminatory action and
any pecuniary (monetary) or non-pecuniary losses/harm experienced by
Complainant. For more information on evidence to determine compensatory
damages: EEOC Management Directive 110, Ch. 11 § VII (Aug. 5, 2015),
available          at          https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/directives/md-
110_chapter_11.cfm (provides the types of compensatory damages
available under EEOC statutes and “Objective Evidence” of entitlement); and
N. Thompson, Compensatory Damages in the Federal Sector: An Overview,
EEOC     Digest   Vol.   XVI,   No.   1    (Winter  2005)     available  at
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/digest/xvi-1.cfm#article (explains Carle v.
Dep’t of the Navy under the subsection “Proof of Damages”).
                                       9                           2022003617

    2. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Compensatory
       Damages FAD is issued, the Agency shall pay Complainant the amount
       of compensatory damages it determined are owed. If there is a dispute
       over the exact amount of compensatory damages owed, the Agency
       shall pay the undisputed amount to Complainant. If Complainant
       disagrees with the agency’s award, they may challenge the Agency’s
       decision on the amount of compensatory damages by filing an appeal
       of the Compensatory Damages FAD with the Commission. Instructions
       on how to appeal, including the deadline to file, will be included in the
       appeal rights portion of the Compensatory Damages FAD.

    3. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of this decision, the
       Agency shall take corrective, curative, or preventative action to ensure
       that employee confidential records are stored in a manner that does
       not release the employees’ confidential medical information in violation
       of the Rehabilitation Act; that is, they are kept in a separate, secure
       medical file(s) that comply with 42 U.S.C. §§ 12112(d)(3)(B) and
       (4)(C); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.14.


    4. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued,
       the individuals identified in this decision shall complete two (2) hours
       of training on the Agency’s obligations under the Rehabilitation Act. 7
       The training shall include an emphasis on maintaining confidentiality of
       employees’ medical information, in addition to any prior protected EEO
       activity.

       For assistance in obtaining the necessary training, the Agency may
       contact the Commission’s Outreach, Training and Engagement Division
       via email, at FederalTrainingandOutreach@eeoc.gov. The Agency shall
       provide the Compliance Officer with proof of attendance, as well as the
       contents and materials it used for the training.       If any of the
       management officials have left the Agency's employ, the Agency shall
       furnish documentation of his/her/their departure date.



7 While the evidence did not reveal who decided to include employees’
confidential medical and EEO information onto the SharePoint site, the
management officials identified in this case did not appear to raise concerns
once they learned of it, and we find that training is appropriate for those
involved in this case. The identities for those to be trained can be found on
pages 138, 146, 153, 159, 166, and 174 of the ROI.
                                       10                          2022003617

   5. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is issued,
      the Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the section listed
      below, entitled “Posting Order.” The Agency shall provide the
      Compliance Officer with the original signed and dated notice, reflecting
      the dates that the notice was posted, along with evidence that the
      notice was physically posted at the facility and electronically.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital
format as provided in the statement entitled "Implementation of the
Commission's Decision." The report shall be submitted via the Federal
Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further, the
report must include supporting documentation of evidence that the
corrective action has been implemented.

                          POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its District Office in Joplin, Missouri facility
copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the
Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy
and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date
this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in
conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that
said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The
original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as
directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's
Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period.
The report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal
Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the
Commission’s corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar
days of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall
submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in
the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance
docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all
compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final
compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting
documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
                                      11                          2022003617

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the
Complainant may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the right to file a civil
action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement.          See 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the
Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in
accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.”
29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in
42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files
a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of
the orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result
in the referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.


                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).
                                     12                          2022003617

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0124)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also
requires the Agency to continue its administrative processing of a portion of
your complaint. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the
date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint
which the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which
has been remanded for continued administrative processing.           In the
alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty
(180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its
final decision on your complaint.
                                       13                          2022003617

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint
the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying
that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in
the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which
you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action,
filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                          __      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 22, 2024
Date
