           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Kandi M., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                             Carlos Del Toro,
                                Secretary,
                          Department of the Navy,
                                 Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2022003833

                       Hearing No. 480-2021-00012X

                        Agency No. 17-67100-47605

                     Prior Hearing No. 480-2019-00136X

                                  DECISION

On July 6, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a), from the Agency’s final action concerning her equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission REVERSES the Agency’s final action.

                             ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented are: (1) whether the Agency properly dismissed some
claims on procedural grounds; (2) whether the EEOC Administrative Judge
(AJ) properly issued a decision without a hearing; and (3) whether the


1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                         2022003833

preponderance of the evidence in the record establishes that Complainant
was subjected to harassment based on national origin, sex, and/or reprisal
as alleged.

                              BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
GS-0344-5 Management Assistant at the Agency’s Production Plant Barstow
(PPB), Program Management Division (PMD), Marine Depot Maintenance
Command, facility in Barstow, California. Report of Investigation (ROI) at
48, 86. Complainant is a Hispanic woman, and she stated that she engaged
in prior protected EEO activity in 2015 when she filed a complaint alleging
discrimination based on disability. ROI at 87. Complainant’s first-line
supervisor was the Supervisory Production Controller (Hawaiian, Chinese,
and African American woman), and her second-line supervisor was the
Branch Manager (Caucasian man). ROI at 87, 119-20, 130-31.

Complainant also served as the local union’s Secretary Treasurer. ROI at 88.
According to Complainant, she requested an external audit, which revealed
misappropriation of funds by the Local Union President (“the Union
President”; man) and others on the executive board of the local union. ROI
at 88-89. Complainant stated that, as a result, on July 5, 2017, the local
union was placed under trusteeship, and a trustee was assigned (“the Union
Trustee”; man). ROI at 88, 100. Complainant alleged that, beginning on July
5, 2017, people who were affected by the audit began subjecting her to non-
stop harassment, including when she was blamed verbally and in writing,
her “name was slandered across the entire military compound,” and people
spread lies about her. ROI at 88-89. Complainant stated that, from July 5
through August 10, 2017, her car was vandalized at work, multiple rumors
spread at work that Complainant slept with higher-ups from the district, and
she was referred to as a “tramp” and “whore.” ROI at 88-89.

Complainant alleged that, on July 6, 2017, the Union President and another
colleague blurted out that the reason that the union was being put under
trusteeship was because Complainant was “Fucking/Sleeping” with the top
guys in the union district. ROI at 28. Complainant stated that the Union
President also loudly and aggressively stated that he had seen Complainant
and the Union Trustee “running around in Hawaii together,” which he said
was the reason for the trusteeship. ROI at 28. Complainant averred that an
Agency employee (Employee-1; man) spread the same sort of rumors,
which he told to multiple coworkers and people in his vanpool. ROI at 28.
                                     3                          2022003833

According to Complainant, another Agency employee (Employee-2; woman)
told people that, because Complainant was sleeping with men in the district,
the district took over the union. ROI at 28.

A Mechanic Leader (African American/Caucasian/Native American woman)
stated that, during the July 6th meeting, Employee-1 asked why they did not
discuss things before taking over the union and said that he knew “this girl”
and “she’s evil.” ROI at 59, 150-51. According to the Mechanic Leader, this
set off the Union President, who smacked the table, proclaimed, “this is all
bull $#%@”, and pointed at the Union Trustee, shouting that all the Union
Trustee wanted was “get in [Complainant]’s pants” and that the Union
President saw how they were acting in Hawaii. ROI at 59. The Mechanic
Leader averred that the Union President also pointed at the Local Union
Sergeant-at-Arms (“the Union Sergeant-at-Arms”; Black man) and accused
him of wanting to “get in [Complainant]’s pants as well before using a few
more choice foul words, slamming the table again, walking out, and
slamming the door behind him. ROI at 59, 140-41. The Mechanic Leader
stated that Employee-2 made a comment, “that’s messed up [Complainant]
is getting these girls fired and she’s dating him, referring and gesturing to
[the Union Trustee].” ROI at 59. According to the Mechanic Leader, when
she asked Employee if she really thought that Complainant was dating the
Union Trustee, Employee-2 responded, “yeah that’s why all this is happening
because she[’]s sleeping with him.” ROI at 59.

A Heavy Mobile Mechanic (Hispanic man) stated that he was at the July 6,
2017, emergency executive board meeting, the Union President said, “this is
bullshit,” pointed to the Union Trustee, and said, “the only reason you are
here is because you are sleeping with her [Complainant],” before leaving the
room. ROI at 61, 154-55. The Union Sergeant-at-Arms stated that, during
the July 6, 2017, meeting when the trusteeship was imposed, the Union
President commented that the Union Trustee was “f..king” Complainant,
noting that he had “seen them in Hawaii.” ROI at 62. According to the Union
Sergeant-at-Arms, when he told the Union President that he had told him
that he needed to check out the Local Union Vice President (“the Union VP”;
man), the Union President accused the Union Sergeant-at-Arms of trying to
“f..k” Complainant before storming out of the meeting. ROI at 62.

Complainant averred that, on or about July 6, 2017, she went to HR to voice
her concerns and spoke with a HR Specialist (White woman). ROI at 144-45,
196, 203.
                                      4                          2022003833

According to Complainant, the HR Specialist suggested that she should go
speak with the Plant Manager (Caucasian man), but she explained that she
was afraid to go to the Plant Manager’s office because his secretary was the
daughter of the Union President, who had started many of the false rumors
about Complainant. ROI at 196, 203. Complainant stated that the HR
Specialist called the Plant Manager to her office and that he told her that it
sounded like a union matter, not an Agency issue, and adding that the
financial issues were “hearsay” at that point. ROI at 89, 106, 196, 203.
Complainant averred that she mentioned that she had names and witnesses.
ROI at 204. Complainant alleged that she told the Plant Manager, that while
it may have begun as a union matter, the rumors were continuing to spread
throughout the workplace, but he said there was nothing he could do. ROI at
196, 203. Complainant averred that this was her only face-to-face meeting
with the Plant Manager. ROI at 203.

According to Complainant, during a July 18, 2017, monthly union
membership meeting, an Agency employee (Employee-3; man) asked
Complainant if the Union Trustee was her boyfriend, “as rumor has it.” ROI
at 29. Complainant stated that, after the July 18, 2017, meeting, another
Agency employee (Employee-4; man) approached the Union Trustee and
said, “Hey, I got one question for you. . . .” then proceeded to ask the Union
Trustee if he was “Fucking [Complainant]”. ROI at 29. Complainant alleged
that, when she got home that evening, she realized her car had been keyed
and deliberately scratched. ROI at 29. Complainant averred that, on August
8, 2017, the Union VP called her “a whore, liar, and snitch.” ROI at 29.
Complainant stated that the Union VP was very hostile and also yelled at a
union district employee (man) about the takeover. ROI at 29.

Complainant averred that, on August 10, 2017, she noticed someone had
put flyers on the bulletin board in the main building where she worked that
included pictures from her Facebook account and typed words that slandered
and defamed her character. ROI at 87-88. Complainant stated that anyone
who worked on the military base and any visitors who gained access to the
compound would be able to see the bulletin board, which was in clear view
and was typically used for newsletters, sharing information about upcoming
events or activities, or advertising open vanpool spots. ROI at 88.
Complainant alleged that she removed the flyers from the bulletin board and
reported them to the Supervisory Production Controller. ROI at 88.
According to Complainant, the Supervisory Production Controller was
concerned and said she would see if any security cameras covered that area.
ROI at 88.
                                     5                          2022003833

Complainant averred that she told the Supervisory Production Controller that
she had “zero confidence” that the Plant Manager or HR would be able to
help her based on how they disregarded her previous concerns. ROI at 88-
89. The Supervisory Production Controller stated that Complainant showed
her a copy of the Facebook posting that had been placed on the bulletin
board on August 10, 2017. ROI at 121. The Plant Manager averred that, on
August 10, 2017, Complainant told her that she did not want to pursue any
action at that time. ROI at 121. According to the Plant Manager, only the
Manpower Branch had permission to place items on the bulletin board, which
was located in a visible, well-trafficked area of the plant. ROI at 108. The
Plant Manager stated that the Marine Corps Police Department (MCPD)
Criminal Investigative Division (CID) investigated but was unable to identify
who placed the Facebook post on the bulletin board. ROI at 107.

The record contains an image from Complainant’s Facebook page, with a
photo from a union training. ROI at 272. Someone typed at the top of the
page that, during the training, Complainant spent most of her time partying
with the Union National Vice President (“the National VP”; man) and the
Union Trustee and that, after the training, Complainant began to make false
allegations against the President, Vice President, and other board members,
leading to the dismissal of the local executive board and the firing of the
Administrative Officer. ROI at 272. The typed message also stated that
Complainant falsified meeting minutes after voting to approve the transfer of
funds for the training. ROI at 272. There are two separate pages with
minutes from an August 11, 2016, Emergency Executive Board Meeting. ROI
at 273-74.

According to Complainant, on August 14, 2017, she was walking up the
stairs to her work area when an unknown employee approached her in the
staircase and yelled, “Hey, is your name [Complainant]?” ROI at 90-91.
Complainant alleged that, when she responded affirmatively, the employee
said, “oh so you’re fucking that new union guy!” ROI at 91. Complainant
averred that she said “excuse me” and “no” and kept walking to her work
area. ROI at 91. Complainant averred that the employee was wearing PPE
including safety glasses and that she did not recognize him as someone she
had seen before. ROI at 91. Complainant stated that she immediately tried
to report the incident to the Supervisory Production Controller, who was in a
meeting, so she reported it to the HR Specialist, as well as other incidents
that had happened since their last meeting. ROI at 91, 197, 203-04.
                                      6                           2022003833

According to Complainant, on August 14, 2017, the HR Specialist said for the
first time that Complainant had the right to report the harassment, but she
did not provide Complainant with any resources for doing so. ROI at 197,
203-04. Complainant alleged that she did not meet with the Plant Manager
on August 14, 2017, and that his statement that he asked her to divulge
names and offered to inquire further was false. ROI at 204.

The Supervisory Production Controller stated that Complainant completed an
official harassment complaint form, which she forwarded through her chain
of command on August 17, 2017. ROI at 120. According to the Supervisory
Production Controller, Complainant’s harassment complaint reported the
August 14, 2017, incident where the employee yelled at her. ROI at 122.
The Branch Manager averred that August 17, 2017, was the first date that
Complainant informed him that she was being subjected to a hostile work
environment. ROI at 131, 134.

The Plant Manager stated that the HR Specialist called him on August 14,
2017, stating that Complainant was in her office asking for advice for dealing
with harassment she was experiencing from union officials, including the
Union President using abusive language toward her during a union meeting.
ROI at 106-07. The Plant Manager characterized Complainant as a
whistleblower who shed light on questionable union financial practices, which
led to the local union being placed into trusteeship. ROI at 106. According to
the Plant Manager, he told Complainant that he did not have the authority to
do anything about an incident that took place outside of work between union
personnel concerning a union issue and that, if she was threatened or
verbally assaulted by the Union President, she should have contacted the
Marine Corps Police Department. ROI at 107. The Plant Manager averred
that Complainant brought up other issues such as her house being
vandalized and people at work making rude comments about Complainant to
her directly and to her friends. ROI at 107. According to the Plant Manager,
he told Complainant he would initiate a management inquiry into her
allegation of a hostile workplace if she provided details such as the names of
the people making rude comments, but she refused to divulge this
information, he did not have anything actionable to address the situation.
ROI at 107.

Complainant stated that, when she arrived at work at 6:30 a.m. on August
17, 2017, she found a threatening letter at her desk. ROI at 92. Complainant
alleged that the letter stated, “[Complainant], snitches get stitches. You and
your family will pay!!!! Being a District 12 slut won’t get you very far!!! Die
snitch bitch!!!” ROI at 92.
                                      7                          2022003833

Complainant averred that she immediately reported the letter to the
Supervisory Production Controller and the Branch Manager, who responded
by contacting base security, the military police, and CID. ROI at 93. The
record contains a note with the following typed message: “[COMPLAINANT],
SNITCHES GET STITCHES -YOU &&& YOUR FAMILY WILL PAY!!!!!!!! BEING A
DISTRICT 12 SLUT WON’T GET YOU VERY FAR!!!!!!!!!!!!” ROI at 270. The
following message was handwritten at the bottom of the note: “DIE SNITCH
BITCH!!!!!!!!!” ROI at 270. According to Complainant, CID conducted an
investigation, but, in her opinion, it was handled very poorly, and they did
not take the matter seriously. ROI at 92.

According to the Supervisory Production Controller, Complainant reported
the threatening note to her at 7:35 a.m. on August 17, 2017, and after
which she immediately called MCPD and escorted Complainant to her office.
ROI at 123. The Branch Manager stated that, while the Supervisory
Production Controller called MCPD, he notified his chain of command about
the incident. ROI at 133. The Supervisory Production Controller averred that
a MCPD officer took statements from her and Complainant and said he would
need to turn the investigation over to CID. ROI at 123. The Supervisory
Production Controller stated that, while awaiting the CID Investigative
Agent, a MCPD officer called for paramedics to examine Complainant
because she was pale and seemed to be having a hard time breathing. ROI
at 123. According to the Supervisory Production Controller, the CID
Investigative Agent took Complainant’s statement and took her to the CID
headquarters. ROI at 123.

The Plant Manager averred that Complainant reported the threatening note
to the Supervisory Production Controller, who called MCPD, and that MCPD
arrived shortly thereafter. ROI at 110. The Plant Manager stated that, after a
preliminary look at the facts and circumstances, the MCPD officer on the
scene determined that CID was the appropriate office to conduct the
investigation. ROI at 110. According to the Plant Manager, after Complainant
received the threatening note on August 17, 2017, he sent an email to
everyone at the Production Plant who had an email account, and he also
directed all managers and supervisors to read the email at the morning
muster so anyone without an email account would also receive the message.
ROI at 108-11. The Plant Manager averred that the email stated that he
would not tolerate such behavior, stated that the guilty party would be
disciplined to the full extent allowed by law, and encouraged anyone with
knowledge to report it to their supervisor and to the CID. ROI at 108-10.
The Plant Manager stated that CID was not able to determine who placed the
note on Complainant’s desk. ROI at 108-10.
                                     8                          2022003833

The record contains a copy of the Agency’s Hostile Work Place Report form
completed by Complainant on August 17, 2017. ROI at 217-18. According to
the form, Complainant stated that, on August 9, 2017, she was walking back
to the office when she noticed a flyer on the bulletin board near the library
that included a photo from her Facebook page showing Complainant and
other union members at a training in Hawaii. ROI at 217. The photo was
captioned with allegations against Complainant, and the flyer also included
the minutes from a union Executive Board meeting. ROI at 217. The form
stated that, on August 14, 2017, Complainant was walking up the staircase
near Program Management when an unknown employee asked Complainant
if her name was “[Complainant]” and then asked if she was “fucking that
new union guy.” ROI at 217. On the morning of August 17, 2017,
Complainant found a note threatening her and her family on her keyboard.
ROI at 217. The Supervisory Production Controller called the MCPD, and the
MCPD officer stated that CID would have to handle the matter. ROI at 217.
The record contains a contemporaneous statement from the Supervisory
Production Controller, who stated she was talking to the Branch Manager in
his office at 6:35 a.m. when Complainant walked in, looking very distraught,
and showed them a piece of paper that was a written threat of harm to
Complainant and her family. ROI at 219. According to the Supervisory
Production Controller, MCPD was called immediately, although a MCPD
officer stated that he would need to contact CID because this form of threat
was “above what he is allowed to process.” ROI at 219. An EMT examined
Complainant because she was shaking and short of breath, but Complainant
declined to go to the hospital. ROI at 219. The Supervisory Production
Controller stated that the CID agent asked Complainant about the
threatening letter, as well as the flyer with a photo from Complainant’s
Facebook that she found the week before on the bulletin board next to the
library. ROI at 219.

The record contains an August 17, 2017, email from the Plant Manager to a
PPB listserv, stating that a note was left on an employee’s computer that
threatened the employee and their family with harm. ROI at 252. The Plant
Manager stated that information about that employee had also been posted
on an official bulletin board in violation of orders and policy governing
bulletin board use. ROI at 252. According to the Plant Manager,
management was appalled by the actions, which were clearly intended to
intimidate an employee, and the conduct would not be tolerated. ROI at 252.
The Plant Manager averred that an investigation was being conducted and
that management would not rest “until the perpetrator of this despicable act
is found and held responsible,” ordering anyone with relevant information to
report it to their immediate supervisor and/or CID. ROI at 252.
                                     9                          2022003833

There is a second August 17, 2017, email from the Plant Manager forwarding
the initial email to supervisors and stating that the email needed to be read
aloud at morning muster. ROI at 253.

The record contains the September 14, 2017, CID Report of Investigation
into the threatening letter placed on Complainant’s desk. ROI at 262-74. The
report stated that CID was closing the investigation because no logical leads
or suspects had been discovered and that, in the event a subject was
identified, the investigation would be reopened. ROI at 262-63.

Complainant averred that, on January 4, 2018, she went to the Finance
Office to help walk a Financial Management Analyst (White woman) through
the steps to complete a task while the Financial Management Analyst was
covering for an absent coworker. ROI at 96, 162-63. According to
Complainant, Complainant was familiar with this task because she had
performed it when she worked in the Finance Office. ROI at 96-98.
Complainant alleged that the new Finance Supervisor entered the room and
loudly said, “What are you doing in here? You’re not allowed in here. Get
out, so long as there is a hostile work environment you cannot come in
here!”, which appeared to refer to a harassment complaint Complainant had
filed with the Agency. ROI at 96-98. Complainant described the Finance
Supervisor’s tone as loud, rude, unprofessional, and extremely adamant,
which shocked Complainant and seemed to surprise the Financial
Management Analyst as well. ROI at 96, 213. Complainant stated that, while
the Finance Supervisor had never been her supervisor, she knew her
because they had worked in the same branch and in her capacity as a union
steward, adding that they never had any issues before that date. ROI at 96,
213. According to Complainant, PMD and the Finance Office were required to
work closely together, but, after January 4, 2018, it became extremely
difficult for her to complete some day-to-day functions, and she no longer
felt comfortable helping coworkers in Finance. ROI at 98.

The Financial Management Analyst stated that she was covering a task for
an absent coworker and asked Complainant for assistance because she had
previously been responsible for the task. ROI at 164. According to the
Financial Management Analyst, once the Finance Supervisor noticed that
Complainant was in the Finance Office, “she yelled for her to leave as she is
no longer welcome in finance due to an ongoing EEO complaint filed by
[Complainant].” The Financial Management Analyst averred that the Finance
Supervisor sounded rather upset that Complainant was in the Finance Office
at all and “did not want her anywhere near any of the members of finance.”
ROI at 164.
                                     10                          2022003833

According to the Financial Management Analyst, after Complainant left, she
was “talked to” by the Finance Supervisor about “never having
[Complainant] come into Finance again due to a pending EEO investigation.”
ROI at 164. The Financial Management Analyst stated that she believed this
was reprisal for Complainant’s prior EEO activity, explaining that
Complainant had left the Finance Office because of harassment and that the
Finance Supervisor referenced Complainant’s “prior issues when she very
negatively asked [Complainant] to leave the area.” ROI at 164-65. The
Financial Management Analyst averred that, for many years, she heard
coworkers make negative comments about Complainant’s clothing, makeup,
and how she carried herself. ROI at 165. According to the Financial
Management Analyst, she felt that she had to hide that she was friends with
Complainant from her coworkers because people continued to make negative
comments about Complainant after she left the Finance Office. ROI at 165.

The Finance Supervisor averred that, before she was the supervisor,
Complainant had asked to be move out of the Finance Office because it was
a hostile work environment. ROI at 159-60. According to the Finance
Supervisor, she heard Complainant speaking with the Financial Management
Analyst and asked if she could speak to her outside of the Finance Office.
ROI at 160. The Finance Supervisor stated:

     I mentioned to [Complainant] due to the HWE that she
     submitted prior to me being reassigned to the Finance Branch
     that I thought it would be a good idea not to come into the
     Finance Office for her safety as well as others. I asked if she had
     business then I would gladly assist if she would give me a call or
     speak to her supervisor rather than putting herself in this
     environment/situation. I mentioned I was only looking out for
     her and others.

ROI at 160. The Finance Supervisor stated that she spoke to Complainant in
a calm manner and that Complainant was appreciative and understood her
explanation. ROI at 160.

The Supervisory Production Controller stated that, after Complainant told her
what happened on January 4, 2018, she contacted the Finance Supervisor.
ROI at 126. According to the Supervisory Production Controller, the Finance
Supervisor told her that she heard Complainant’s office and walked out of
her office to ask Complainant if she could speak with her in the hallway. ROI
at 126.
                                     11                         2022003833

The Supervisory Production Controller averred that the Finance Supervisor
informed her that she asked Complainant to leave the Finance Office due to
her pending harassment claim and that it would be in Complainant’s best
interest “if she [Complainant] would not put herself into a situation and if
[Complainant] needs anything pertaining with the finance office to call [the
Finance Supervisor] and she will assist.” ROI at 126. The Supervisory
Production Controller stated that the Finance Supervisor said she was very
professional and did not disrespect Complainant in any way. ROI at 126.

The record contains May 4-5, 2017, emails from the Finance Branch Manager
to Complainant, asking her to sign the Hostile Work Place Report and noting
that he had received her statement. ROI at 228-30. In her statement,
Complainant stated that, after she began working in the Finance Office,
rumors began circulating in the department and throughout the base that
Complainant was a stripper and that she got the job because she was a
“personal stripper” for the former Plant Manager and “basically some sort of
whore.” ROI at 239. According to Complainant, although she consistently
wore business attire, she was constantly called into her supervisor’s office
with complaints about her appearance from other women and singled out for
dress code compliance. ROI at 239-40. Complainant requested that she be
moved away from the women in the Finance Department who were
subjecting her to a hostile work environment. ROI at 243.

Complainant alleged that, on February 12, 2018, the Branch Manager called
her into his office and told her that a very vulgar and graphic flyer
concerning Complainant that had been brought to his attention. ROI at 99.
Complainant stated that the flyer was pornographic, with a photo depicting
multiple men having sex with a woman, whose face was covered with arrows
to a message that those “wanting to have a good time” should call
Complainant, and the flyer listed her personal cell phone number. ROI at 99-
102. Complainant averred that, by covering the woman’s face and including
her name and cell phone number, the implication was that she was the
woman in the photo. ROI at 102. According to Complainant, the Branch
Manager handled the situation very professionally and told her that he had
already contacted CID, the EEO office, and the Plant Manager prior to calling
her into his office. ROI at 99-100. Complainant averred that, later on
February 12th, a supervisor in another department (“the Engineering
Supervisor”; Asian man) told her that he had found a copy of the flyer while
working overtime on Saturday, February 10, 2018. ROI at 99-100, 174-75.
                                      12                          2022003833

According to Complainant, an Engineering Technician (White man), an IT
Specialist (Caucasian man), the Risk Management Division Manager
(Hispanic man), an Occupational Safety & Health Specialist (Safety-1;
Hispanic man), another Safety Specialist (Safety-2; woman), and someone
else who worked in IT (“the IT Contractor”; man) also reported finding
copies of the flyer. ROI at 102, 114, 137, 166-67, 170-71, 178-79, 182-84.

The record contains a black and white flyer with a graphic image of multiple
men having sex with a woman, the woman’s face is covered, and
Complainant’s first and last name is nearby in all capital letters. ROI at 277.
The following message is at the bottom of the flyer: “WANT A GOOD TIME
CALL [COMPLAINANT’S FIRST NAME]. SHE WILLFULLY FILLS ALL NEEDS
CUM ALL!!! ACTUAL[] FOOTAGE. CALL [PHONE NUMBER] FOR YOUR TURN.”
ROI at 277. Complainant’s first and last name also appear at the top of the
flyer in all capital letters. ROI at 277. To the left of the image, there is the
following message “[THE UNION TRUSTEE]/[THE NATIONAL VP] *ALL OTHER
COCK TRU[S]TEES.” ROI at 277.

The Branch Manager stated that, on February 12, 2018, the IT Contractor
brought a flyer to his office that he found in the stairwell, which he reported
to CID. ROI at 137. According to the Branch Manager, MCPD came to the
building to take statements. ROI at 137-38. The Supervisory Production
Controller stated that she was on scheduled leave on February 12, 2018,
and that the Branch Manager informed her of the incident on February 13th.
ROI at 127-28.

According to Complainant, the Plant Manager seemed to want to ignore and
cover up what had happened. ROI at 100-01, 210. Complainant alleged that
the Plant Manager waited a day or so until after she had sent an email to the
base attorney, her chain of command, and the EEO office that the Plant
Manager sent an email to the workforce about the situation and stated that
there was zero tolerance for that sort of activity. ROI at 101, 210.
Complainant averred that, since she received the death threat at her desk in
August 2017, she had been asking management to use security cameras and
monitor the footage, both as a safety precaution and to identify the
responsible parties. ROI at 101. Complainant stated that, during the
investigation, she learned that the security cameras in the building were not
operational and that the Plant Manager did not want people to know that the
cameras did not work. ROI at 101. Complainant alleged that, even if the
harassment started out as a union matter, the harassment escalated and
permeated the workplace, where both Complainant and the employees
affected by the union audit worked. ROI at 101-02.
                                    13                         2022003833

The record contains an email Complainant sent at 3:00 p.m. on February 13,
2018, to managers including the Supervisory Production Controller, the
Branch     Manager,    and   the   Plant    Manager    with   an   attached
Harassment/Discrimination Advisory Report form. ROI at 244, 251.
According to Complainant, on February 12th, the Branch Manager called her
into his office and informed her about some very disturbing and
pornographic images that had been found around the base beginning on
February 10th. depicting a woman being penetrated by multiple men. ROI at
244. The flyers depicted a woman being penetrated by multiple men
simultaneously, the woman’s face was covered with arrows, Complainant’s
full name was written in bold letters, and below it said something to the
effect of “for those wanting a good time to call me ‘[Complainant]’” along
with Complainant’s actual cell phone number. ROI at 244. In the email,
Complainant averred that she had no confidence in the Plant Manager, HR,
or the EEO office and requested that the Investigator General (IG) assign
someone to investigate the matter, rather than the Plant Manager or the
EEO office. ROI at 244. Complainant stated, “While this may have begun
because of a union matter, it has spilled out to a work matter,” adding that
people should feel safe in their work environments, rather than physically
and emotionally ill from ongoing harassment. ROI at 244. Complainant noted
that, while she could not attach “the vulgar and graphic images” using her
Agency computer, the images could be obtained from MCPD CID. ROI at
244.

The Plant Manager stated that, on February 12, 2018, the Branch Manager
brought two pages that the Plant Manager described as “containing
pornographic images of [Complainant]” to his office that an IT Contractor
(man) found in the stairwell next to the technical library. ROI at 114, 137.
According to the Plant Manager, flyers with the pornographic images were
found in multiple locations on the morning of February 12th. ROI at 114. The
Plant Manager averred that he directed the Branch Manager to contact the
MCPD, who responded that morning. ROI at 114. The Plant Manager stated
that he contacted MCPD’s CID to initiate an investigation. ROI at 115.
According to the Plant Manager, he had MDMC security personnel save all
entry point video surveillance camera footage for February 9-11, 2018, onto
an external hard drive and print the access point logs for the criminal and
management directed investigations. ROI at 115. The Plant Manager stated
that CID conducted its investigation from February 16 through April 9, 2018,
but was unable to determine who was responsible. ROI at 115.
                                     14                          2022003833

The Plant Manager stated that he sent an email to the workforce with
instructions to managers and supervisors to read the message at morning
muster for those without email access. ROI at 115. According to the Plant
Manager, his email stated that the acts of intimidation and harassment were
intolerable and that management intended to do everything possible to find
the guilty party(s), and he requested that people come forward with any
information. ROI at 115. The record contains an email the Plant Manager
sent at 3:31 p.m. on February 13, 2018, to a PPB listserv, stating that, on or
about February 12, pornographic images were placed in various locations
throughout the plant and noting that, in August 2017, the same employee
received a threatening note, and information about the employee was
improperly posted on an official bulletin board. ROI at 253. The February
13th email included language stating that management would not tolerate
these continued actions, that an investigation was being conducted, and
ordering anyone with information to report it to their supervisor and/or CID.
ROI at 254. At 3:27 p.m., the Plant Manager had sent to supervisors and
managers a version of the email that was sent to the PPB listserv with a
copy of the EEO policy attached, asking them to read the email at the
morning muster and to print and hand out hard copies of the EEO policy.
ROI at 255-56.

The Plant Manager averred that, on February 13, 2018, Complainant
requested that the Marine Corps Logistics Command (LOGCOM) Inspector
General (IG) conduct an investigation. ROI at 115. According to the Plant
Manager, he forwarded Complainant’s email to LOGCOM and was told that
the IG would only investigate if it involved military members. ROI at 115.
The Plant Manager requested that LOGCOM appoint an investigator to
conduct a management investigation, and he stated that the investigator
was appointed on February 16, 2018. ROI at 115. On February 14, 2018, the
Plant Manager forwarded Complainant’s February 13 email to the LOGCOM
IG and asking if their office would be appointing someone to investigate. ROI
at 257-58. On February 15, 2018, the LOGCOM Staff Secretary/Command
Inspector General responded, asking if the matter involved a military
member and suggested that, if the matter was “civilian on civilian,” it would
be better to handle by management inquiry. ROI at 257. On February 16,
2018, the LOGCOM Commanding General directed an investigator to conduct
a management investigation into Complainant’s allegations. ROI at 260-61.

According to the Plant Manager, on February 15, 2018, he asked the
Supervisory Production Controller to convey to Complainant that he would
relocate her to the secured lab area in a secured building with very limited
access and doors that were cypher lock enabled. ROI at 115.
                                       15                          2022003833

The Plant Manager stated that, while relocating Complainant might not stop
whoever was placing the documents, it would provide physical security for
her. ROI at 115. The Plant Manager averred that Complainant did not want
to move. ROI at 115. Complainant denied that the Plant Manager asked her
if she wanted to move to the secured lab on February 15, 2018, stating that
her doctor took her out of work starting February 14, 2018. ROI at 210.
According to Complainant, when she returned to work in April and learned
that additional flyers had been discovered during her medical leave, the
Supervisory Production Controller mentioned the possibility of moving to the
secured lab area. ROI at 210. Complainant alleged that she told the
Supervisory Production Controller that she did not feel safe moving to an
area away from the Supervisory Production Controller and others, where, if
something happened to Complainant, she would be alone. ROI at 210.

Complainant stated that, after learning about the flyers, she took a 60-day
medical leave for severe depression. ROI at 102. Complainant alleged that
she continued to feel less secure and less safe in the workplace because
nothing was resolved and she was in constant fear of what would happen
next. ROI at 103. Complainant averred that Safety-1 found one of the flyers
during her 60-day leave. ROI at 207. Safety-1 stated that he was cleaning
the Safety area in April 2018 with Safety-2 when he found a copy of the
pornographic flyer involving Complainant sitting face down on an unused
table. ROI at 184. According to Safety-1, he immediately folded the flyer in
half and turned it in to his supervisor. ROI at 184. Complainant alleged that,
although additional people reported the flyers, the Plant Manager ignored
this new information. ROI at 210-11. According to Complainant, during her
absence, CID conducted an investigation. ROI at 102. Complainant averred
that, when she spoke to the CID agent about the new information, the agent
told her that he was only aware of people who had reported seeing the flyer
on February 10 and 12, 2018. ROI at 210-11. Complainant stated that CID
was unable to identify the responsible individual(s), describing it like “finding
a needle in a haystack.” ROI at 102.

The record contains a March 21, 2018, CID Report of Investigation
concerning obscene papers found depicting two men and one woman in a
sexually explicit position found in common areas at PPB. ROI at 283-84. The
report stated that, because no logical leads or suspect(s) or person(s) of
interest had been discovered, the investigation was being closed as
unresolved but would be reopened in the event that a subject was identified.
ROI at 284. According to the report, the investigator had attempted to
contact the Staff Judge Advocates Office to go over the investigation but had
not received a response. ROI at 284.
                                      16                         2022003833

The latest entry in the Report of Investigation is April 5, 2018, so it is not
clear if CID followed up with the individuals who found copies of the flyer
after Complainant went on leave. ROI at 284.

During the EEO investigation, the investigator asked the Plant Manager if he
engaged union officials in order to help stop and prevent further harassment
of Complainant. ROI at 116. The Plant Manager responded,

      No, it would not have been appropriate for management to
      contact union officials for what is a management responsibility.
      Contact might also have [been] interpreted by union officials as
      an attempt to blame them or hold them responsible for the
      things that happened to Complainant.

ROI at 116.

Complainant initiated contact with an EEO counselor on August 16, 2017. On
September 28, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint, which she
subsequently amended, alleging that she was subjected to discriminatory
harassment based on national origin (Hispanic), 2 sex (female), and reprisal
for prior protected EEO activity when:

      a.      On July 6, 2017, during a union meeting at the union hall, the
              Union President said the reason the union was being put under
              trusteeship was because Complainant was sleeping with the top
              guys in the district;
      b.      On July 18, 2017, during a union meeting, Employee-3 pointed
              to Complainant and asked her if she was the Union Trustee’s
              girlfriend as “rumor had it”;
      c.      On July 18, 2017, during a monthly union member meeting at
              the union hall, Employee-4 asked the Union Trustee if he was
              “fucking [Complainant]” and, during the same meeting,
              Employee-3 asked Complainant if the Union Trustee was her
              boyfriend;
      d.      On August 8, 2017, outside of the workplace, the Union VP
              called Complainant a whore, liar, and snitch and yelled at the
              Union District Employee for the union takeover;

2
  Although Complainant designated her race as “Hispanic,” the Commission
recognizes this term as an indication of national origin rather than race.
Accordingly, we will address her claim as involving an allegation of national
origin discrimination.
                                    17                        2022003833

     e.    On August 10, 2017, an unknown person placed a Facebook
           picture along with typed words to slander and defame
           Complainant’s character on the bulletin board in the building
           where Complainant worked;
     f.    On August 14, 2017, while Complainant was returning to work
           and coming up the staircase, an unknown employee yelled,
           “Hey, [Complainant]! Is your name [Complainant]?” and, when
           Complainant responded “yes,” then asked Complainant, “So
           you’re the one that is fucking that new union guy who took over,
           huh?”;
     g.    On August 17, 2017, at the beginning of Complainant’s shift,
           Complainant found an anonymous letter on her work desk that
           stated, “[Complainant], snitches get stitches. You and your
           family will pay!!!! Being a District 12 slut won’t get you very
           far!!! Die snitch bitch!!!”;
     h.    On January 4, 2018, the Finance Supervisor told Complainant to
           leave the Finance Office because of a pending hostile work
           environment claim; and
     i.    On February 12, 2018, Complainant learned that a flyer was
           found in the workplace depicting multiple men having sex with a
           woman, where the face of the woman was covered with arrows
           to a message for those wanting to have a good time to call
           “[Complainant]” along with Complainant’s personal cell number
           and was informed that copies of the same flyer were posted
           throughout her workplace starting Saturday, February 10, 2018.

The Agency dismissed allegations (a), (b), (c), and (d), stating that the
dismissal was pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(a)(2) for naming an
improper agency because the incidents occurred outside of the workplace
and between union officials regarding union matters. 3




3
   The Agency dismissed an additional claim pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.107(a)(1) for failure to state a claim. Complainant does not challenge
the dismissal of this claim on appeal. The Commission exercises its
discretion to address only those issues specifically raised on appeal and
declines to address this procedural dismissal. See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110) at
Chap. 9, § IV.A (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                    18                         2022003833

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing   before     an    Equal    Employment     Opportunity  Commission
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing, and the
matter was docketed as Hearing No. 480-2019-00136X. Complainant filed a
motion to amend her complaint to include the dismissed allegations (a)
through (d).

The Agency filed a motion for summary judgment, arguing that the alleged
harassment was based on Complainant’s union whistleblowing and that there
was no reason to believe that the harassment was based on her race and
sex. According to the Agency, although some of the words and the
pornographic image had sexual contend that could easily support a claim of
sexual harassment in a different case, the circumstances in this case showed
that “any discrimination was based on anger from ousted Union leaders over
the Complainant’s disclosures.” MSJ at 11. The Agency also contended that it
took prompt and reasonable action, while Complainant only partially
cooperated in management’s investigation. The Agency’s motion cited a
Human Resources Satellite Office Sign-In Sheet, which appears to show that
Complainant visited the office on July 10, 2017, and August 14, 2017. MSJ
at Attachments 1, 2. The Agency also cited a May 23, 2018, email from the
Heavy Mobile Mechanic, who was acting as Complainant’s union
representative, to the Supervisory Production Controller, which states:

     I have just talked to Complainant about her meeting today
     pertaining to her case as she has stated that management is
     NOT going to accommodate her with tele-work, she will not be
     making any phone conference today due to [Complainant] is still
     under Dr. Care and is not in a right state of mind to answer any
     kind of questions pertaining to her case [Complainant] will be
     able to complete her investigation as soon as her Dr. clears her
     for duty.

MSJ at Attachment 3. On May 23, 2018, the Supervisory Production
Controller responded, stating that she understood the concern for
Complainant’s state of mind during an investigative interview and, if
Complainant’s mental state improved, they could arrange a meeting. MSJ at
Attachment 3.
                                     19                          2022003833

The Agency asserted that, while it appeared as though the Finance
Supervisor blocked Complainant from the Finance Office because of her EEO
activity, Complainant was referencing a 2015 EEO complaint, which the
Finance Supervisor had no knowledge of. According to the Agency, the case
referenced by the Finance Supervisor was a hostile work environment
allegation that “was not an EEO case at all.” MSJ at 15. The Agency also
argued that the Finance Supervisor did not ask Complainant to leave in
retaliation for filing a complaint but based on Complainant’s previous stated
concern for her safety. Finally, the Agency argued that it properly dismissed
allegations (a) through (d) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(a)(2) because
they involved conduct by union officials during an official union meeting held
regarding exclusively union matters.

Complainant filed a response opposing the Agency’s motion for summary
judgment and challenging the Agency’s recitation of the undisputed material
fact. According to Complainant, she established that she was subjected to
harassment based on her sex and her prior protected EEO activity. According
to Complainant, the harassment included death threats and pornographic
flyers that continued to circulate in the workplace after February 2018, and,
as a result, she was forced to sell her house, and she attempted suicide.
Complainant contended that the Agency failed to promptly investigate when
she reported sexual harassment to the Plant Manager and the HR Specialist
in July 2017. Complainant argued that the Plant Manager’s August 17, 2017,
email did not constitute effective action because it did not include accurate
information regarding the Agency’s internal harassment policy and
procedures and did not stop the harassment. Finally, Complainant asserted
that the Agency could not escape liability for the dismissed allegations by
arguing that the issues were purely union issues because the issues did not
involve union officials acting in their representational capacity. Complainant
further noted that, at the time, there were no local union officials because
the local had been put in trusteeship.

The Agency replied to Complainant’s opposition, arguing that Complainant
failed to raise a genuine dispute of material fact. The Agency argued that it
was entitled to judgment as a matter of law on the basis of race. The Agency
also contended that Complainant failed to provide facts to establish a prima
facie case of reprisal based on prior EEO activity. According to the Agency,
Complainant did not show that the harassment was based on her protected
classes rather than a response by ousted union officials and their supporters
against anyone perceived to be part of the union takeover. The Agency
asserted that management took reasonable and prompt measures to
address Complainant’s allegations.
                                     20                          2022003833

On September 30, 2020, the AJ assigned to the case issued an Order
Dismissing Complainant’s Request for Hearing Without Prejudice and
Scheduling Status Conference. Complainant’s hearing request was reinstated
under Hearing No. 480-2021-00012X.

On May 2, 2022, the AJ granted the Agency’s motion for summary judgment
and issued a decision without a hearing finding no discrimination. The AJ
adopted, with modifications, the statement of undisputed material facts set
forth in Complainant’s opposition to the Agency’s motion. The AJ reversed
the Agency’s dismissal of allegations (a) through (d) for failure to state a
claim, finding that the allegations did not concern union matters and were
properly assessed as part of Complainant’s hostile work environment claim.

However, the AJ found that, while these statements and actions were not
subject to dismissal because they occurred during or as part of an internal
union trusteeship dispute, the context was relevant in assessing whether the
totality of the harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to create a
hostile work environment for a reasonable person in Complainant’s
circumstances. According to the AJ, considering that context, allegations (a)
through (g), while very offensive, were insufficiently severe or pervasive to
create an abusive working environment for a reasonable person in
Complainant’s circumstances. The AJ found the Commission’s decision in
Janay K. v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal Nos. 2019004210 & 2019005734
(Sept. 17, 2020), which affirmed the agency’s final action finding that the
harassment was not motivated by complainant’s sex or severe or pervasive,
to be instructive. In Janay K., complainant alleged that: (1) there was a
rumor that complainant, a female Special Agent, was sleeping with a
married police officer; (2) a sergeant at the Sheriff’s Office stated he could
not have “those girls working over here,” referring to complainant, who was
working on a task force at the Sheriff’s Office; (3) on an ongoing basis, a
male colleague displayed indignant behavior and demeaned and
disrespected complainant in front of new agents; (4) a rumor that
complainant was sleeping with a married officer was posted online; (5) while
complainant and her male colleague were executing an arrest warrant, they
had a disagreement, and the colleague called complainant a “cunt”; (6) for
over a year, the male colleague repeatedly told new agents that whatever
advice complainant provided was “stupid”; and (7) a second male colleague,
in a room full of federal agents and task force members awaiting a grand
jury, stated that the office (to which he and complainant were assigned and
where complainant was one of only two female agents) was a mess and that
the Resident Agent in Charge was “banging” a female agent.
                                      21                          2022003833

The AJ stated that, in Janay K., the Commission held that, while the conduct
and statements were offensive, the undisputed evidence showed that the
incidents were more likely the result of workplace disputes and petty
jealousy between two coworkers stemming from routine workplace conflicts
between the male colleague and complainant. Further, the AJ noted that,
while it was undoubtedly true that complainant was offended by the rumors
about her affair with a police officer, the Commission found that “gossip of
this sort was common in the workplace regardless of the sex of the subject
of the gossip” and that the weight of the evidence did not establish a
discriminatory motivation to the actions in dispute. The AJ determined that,
in the instant case, the harassment stemmed from the workplace-related
conflict between Complainant and the people who objected to Complainant’s
actions that led to the local union being placed in trusteeship. According to
the AJ, male employees who believed to have caused or benefited from the
trusteeship were also subjected to harassing statements and conduct.

According to the AJ, two events appeared to be unrelated to the union
conflict: the Finance Supervisor asking Complainant to leave the Finance
Office and the copies of the flyer being found at work February 10-12, 2018.
The AJ found that the Finance Supervisor’s request did not impact a term,
condition, or privilege of Complainant’s employment and was not reasonably
likely to deter Complainant or other employees from engaging in EEO
activity. The AJ determined that there was no evidence that Complainant’s
national origin or sex was a basis for her request. The AJ therefore
concluded that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of
discriminatory or retaliatory harassment regarding the Finance Supervisor’s
request.

The AJ found that, although the flyer was highly offensive, liability could not
be imputed to the Agency regarding the flyer. According to the AJ, upon the
discovery of the flyer, the Plant Manager directed the Branch Manager to
contact MCPD CID, who investigated, and directed security personnel to save
all entry point video surveillance camera footage from February 9-11, 2018,
and to print the access point log files. The AJ noted that the Plant Manager
sent an email on February 13, 2018, addressing the August 2017 note and
the flyers found from February 10-12, 2018, and directed managers and
supervisors to read the email message and hand out copies of the Agency’s
EEO policy at the morning muster. The AJ found that the Plant Manager
offered to relocate Complainant to a secure building with limited access that
would provide her with physical therapy and that Complainant declined to be
relocated.
                                      22                          2022003833

The AJ determined that the Agency took immediate and appropriate
corrective action to address the harassment and that the Agency’s action
was reasonably calculated to address the harassment and halt further
harassment and concluded that, as a result, liability could not be imputed to
the Agency for the February 2018 harassment.

When the Agency failed to issue a final order within forty days of receipt of
the AJ’s decision, the AJ’s decision finding that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged became the
Agency’s final action pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(i).

The instant appeal followed.

                         CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contends that the AJ found that the Plant Manager’s
action on February 13, 2022, was reasonably calculated to address
harassment that, by that point, had been continuing for months.
Complainant notes that the Plant Manager’s February 13th email referenced
the August 2017 note and stated that management was appalled “by these
continued actions” that were intended to intimidate an Agency employee.
Complainant also points out that copies of the flyer continued to appear in
the workplace after the Plant Manager sent the email on February 13th.
Complainant also argues that the Agency failed to provide accurate
information regarding the Agency’s internal harassment policy and
procedures. According to Complainant, the AJ appropriately determined that
allegations (a) through (d) were properly before the Commission because
the harassment was not conducted by individuals acting in a
representational capacity and that, at the time, there were no union officials
because the local union had been put in trusteeship. Complainant questions
how the AJ found that the sexually harassing and vulgar conduct and
statements directed towards her was motivated by Complainant’s perceived
role in causing the local union to be placed under trusteeship. Complainant
asserts that she was subjected to sexually harassing and vulgar language
that amounted to discriminatory harassment based on sex.

In response, the Agency characterizes Complainant’s appeal as a case about
an officer in the local union who reported that her local union was engaging
in financial improprieties, which resulted in the national chapter removing all
of the local union officers and placing the local chapter in trusteeship.
                                     23                          2022003833

According to the Agency, Complainant subsequently was subjected to
disparaging comments and treatment that she asserts were based on her
race, sex, and reprisal rather than her perceived “snitching” on the union
and the resulting removal of local union officers. The Agency contends that,
on appeal, Complainant fails to identify any material facts in dispute. The
Agency asserts that the Finance Supervisor was unaware of Complainant’s
2015 EEO complaint or any other protected EEO activity and that it was
unlikely that the Finance Supervisor asking Complainant to leave the work
area would deter a reasonable person from engaging in protected activity.
The Agency contends that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case
of harassment based on sex because the record was replete with evidence
that the offensive conduct towards Complainant was based on anger at her
perceived rule in the union takeover. According to the Agency, there is
evidence that Black and White individuals, including men, received similar
treatment and were yelled at during union meetings, accused of sexual
relationships, and were the subject of pornographic flyers. The Agency
argues that, even taken together, the name calling, the pornographic picture
with Complainant’s name on it, a posting on a bulletin board, a brief
exchange in a stairwell where Complainant was accused of sleeping with a
union official, and “a letter purportedly left on the Complainant[’s] desk
calling her snitch and slut,” these events were not pervasive or sufficiently
severe to establish an abusive workplace. Agency Brief at 9. The Agency
states that the AJ correctly cited Janay K. and that a similar decision is
warranted in the instant case despite the sexual nature of the comments.

                           STANDARD OF REVIEW

In rendering this appellate decision we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and
factual conclusions, and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that a “decision on an appeal from an
Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”); see also
Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an
administrative judge’s determination to issue a decision without a hearing,
and the decision itself, will both be reviewed de novo). This essentially
means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other words, we
are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and
Agency’s, factual conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate
fact of whether intentional discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of
whether any federal employment discrimination statute was violated. See
id. at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
                                     24                          2022003833

factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS

Procedural Dismissal

The Agency dismissed allegations (a) through (d), reasoning that this
portion of the complaint was filed against an improper agency. The
regulation set forth at 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) states, in relevant part,
that an agency shall dismiss a complaint or any portion of a complaint that
fails to state a claim under § 1614.106(a). Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.106(a), a complaint must be filed with the agency that allegedly
discriminated against the complainant.

The Commission has no jurisdiction over claims related to the terms of a
collective bargaining agreement, enforcing the terms of a collective
bargaining agreement, or relations with union representatives. See Herb P.
v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 2020000916 (July 15, 2021);
Lawrence L. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120160893 (Apr. 26,
2016); McDonald v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A60555 (May 19,
2006). However, the Agency may be liable under Title VII for failing to take
action to remedy the harassment of its employees by third parties, including
by union officials who were also employees of the Agency, even if the union
officials were acting in their union capacity. See Alba H. v. Dep’t of the Air
Force, EEOC Appeal No. 0120171882 (Aug. 9, 2017) (complainant’s
complaint alleging numerous instances of harassment by the union president
stated a claim) req. for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520170608 (Feb.
8, 2018) (finding that the complaint was properly filed against the agency
because complainant alleged numerous incidents of harassment by another
agency employee while working at an agency facility); Sammons v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A55105 (Dec. 19, 2005) (reversing
dismissal of complainant’s claim that a union representative asked for sexual
favors in exchange for union representation); but see Sammons v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120064523 (Sept. 5, 2008) (affirming
decision finding that complainant could not establish a prima facie case of
harassment because there was no basis for imputing liability to the agency
because the record established that the alleged harassment did not take
place on agency property and the alleged harasser, who was not an agency
                                    25                         2022003833

employee, was a union official acting in his union capacity). Here, we find
that the AJ properly reversed the Agency’s dismissal of allegations (a)
through (d) for failure to state a claim and that the record is sufficiently
developed to address the merits of these allegations.

Summary Judgment

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a
hearing upon finding that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision without a hearing regulation follows
the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. The
U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge
determines no genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and
evidentiary standards. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255
(1986). In ruling on a summary judgment motion, the judge is to determine
whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to weighing the
evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must
believe the non-moving party’s evidence and must draw justifiable
inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of
fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving
party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital
Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the
potential to affect the outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the
record has been adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC
Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003). We carefully reviewed the record and
find that it is adequately developed. To successfully oppose a decision
without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of record that
are in dispute or present further material evidence establishing facts in
dispute.

Here, we find that there are no genuine issues of material fact and that the
AJ properly issued a decision without a hearing. We also note that
Complainant’s brief in support of her appeal focused exclusively on
harassment based on sex and reprisal. The Commission exercises its
discretion to address only those issues specifically raised on appeal and
declines to address Complainant’s allegation that she was subjected to
discrimination based on national origin. See EEO MD-110 at Chap. 9, § IV.A.
                                     26                          2022003833

However, as discussed further below, we find that the AJ incorrectly issued a
decision in favor of the Agency, as the preponderance of the evidence
establishes that Complainant was subjected to harassment based on sex and
reprisal for which the Agency is liable. See Shayna P. v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141506 (June 2, 2017) (the AJ properly issued a
decision without a hearing but issued the decision in favor of the incorrect
party because the preponderance of the evidence established that the
agency discriminated against complainant).

Sexual Harassment

In order to establish a prima facie case of sexual harassment, a complainant
must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of five
elements: (1) that she is a member of a statutorily protected class; (2) that
she was subjected to unwelcome conduct related to her sex; (3) that the
harassment complained of was based on her sex; (4) that the harassment
had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with her work
performance and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment; and (5) that there is a basis for imputing liability to the
employer. Celine      B.   v.   Dep’t    of    the   Navy,   EEOC     Appeal
No. 2019001961 (Sept. 21, 2020). The harasser’s conduct should be
evaluated from the objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim’s
circumstances. Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace,
EEOC Notice No. 915.064 at § III.B.3.d (Apr. 29, 2024).

In other words, to prove her hostile work environment claim, Complainant
must establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe
or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in Complainant’s position would
have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also
prove that the conduct was taken because of a protected basis; in this case,
her sex. Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements – hostility
and motive – will the question of Agency liability present itself.

With respect to element (5), an employer is subject to vicarious liability for
harassment when it is created by a supervisor with immediate (or
successively higher) authority over the employee.          See Burlington
Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742, 118 S. Ct. 2257, 2270 (1998);
Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 118 S. Ct. 2275, 2292-93
(1998). However, where the harassment does not result in a tangible
employment action the agency can raise an affirmative defense, which is
subject to proof by a preponderance of the evidence, by demonstrating: (1)
that it exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any
                                     27                          2022003833

harassing behavior; and (2) that complainant unreasonably failed to take
advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the
agency or to avoid harm otherwise. See Burlington Industries, supra;
Faragher, supra; Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace, at
§ IV.C.2. This defense is not available when the harassment results in a
tangible employment action (e.g., a discharge, demotion, or undesirable
reassignment) being taken against the employee. In the case of coworker
harassment, an agency is responsible for acts of harassment in the
workplace where the agency (or its agents) knew or should have known of
the conduct, unless it can show that it took immediate and appropriate
corrective action. Id.

It is undisputed that, in her capacity as the local union Secretary Treasurer,
Complainant requested an external audit of the local union’s finances and
that, as a result, union district personnel placed the local union in
trusteeship on July 5, 2017. When the local was placed under trusteeship,
the local union executive board, including Complainant, were relieved of
their union duties. During a July 6, 2017, union meeting, the record reflects
that various former local union officials, including the Union President,
blamed Complainant for the local union’s problems. These local union
officials, including the Union President, stated that the union was placed in
trusteeship because Complainant was sleeping with district union officials,
including the Union Trustee, and because district union officials wanted to
“get into Complainant’s pants.” Union members asked Complainant if she
was the Union Trustee’s girlfriend and asked the Union Trustee if he was
“fucking [Complainant].” The Union VP called Complainant “a whore, liar,
and snitch.”

As these rumors began to spread in the workplace, Complainant reported it
to the HR Specialist and also spoke with the Plant Manager. Complainant
stated that the Plant Manager told her that it was a union matter that he
could not pursue, whereas the Plant Manager stated that Complainant would
not provide the needed details for him to investigate the matter.

On August 10, 2017, Complainant reported that she found documents
posted on an official bulletin board in the building where she worked,
including a photo from her Facebook showing her at district union training in
Hawaii with an added caption alleging that Complainant spent the training
partying with the Union Trustee and the National VP.
                                      28                          2022003833

On August 14, 2017, Complainant reported that she was walking up the
stairs to return to work when an unknown employee asked if her name was
Complainant and, when she responded affirmatively, asked her if she was
“the one that is fucking that new union guy who took over.”

On August 17, 2017, Complainant found an anonymous letter on her desk at
work. The letter, which was typed in all capital letters, stated that “snitches
get stitches,” that Complainant and her family would “pay,” and that being a
district “slut” would not get her very far. At the bottom, “Die snitch bitch!!!”
was handwritten in all capital letters. Complainant reported the letter to the
Supervisory Production Controller and the Branch Manager, who immediately
contacted MCPD, who determined that CID would need to handle the
investigation. On August 17, 2017, the Plant Manager sent an email to the
plant, stating that such conduct would not be tolerated and imploring
anyone with knowledge to come forward. On August 17, 2017, Complainant
completed an Agency Hostile Work Place form, alleging harassment including
the threatening letter she found on August 17, being accosted by an
unknown employee who asked if she was “fucking that new union guy” on
August 14, and finding flyers on a bulletin board including a photo from
Complainant’s Facebook that was captioned with allegations against
Complainant. CID closed the investigation.

Between February 10-12, 2018, Agency employees began finding
pornographic flyers in the workplace that depicted multiple men having sex
with a woman. The woman’s face was covered, but Complainant’s full name
was on the flyer, and the flyer suggested calling Complainant and included
her real cell phone number. The Branch Manager, who learned about the
flyers on February 12th, immediately reported the matter to MCPD CID and
subsequently notified Complainant about the discovery. CID conducted an
investigation, and the Agency also conducted its own internal management
investigation. Employees continued to find the pornographic flyers through
at least April 2018, but the record does not reflect that the subsequent
discoveries were reported to CID or that CID interviewed the employees who
found copies of the flyer after February 12, 2018.

Complainant’s physician placed her on a 60-day medical leave. Complainant
returned to work in April 2018 and learned that additional copies of the flyer
had been discovered during her medical leave. The Supervisory Production
Controller informed Complainant that the Plant Manager had offered to
relocate Complainant to another building with secured access and doors that
were cypher lock enabled, but Complainant declined this relocation offer.
Complainant subsequently took additional extended medical leave.
                                    29                         2022003833

It is undisputed that Complainant is a member of a protected class based on
her sex and can therefore establish the first prong of a prima facie case of
harassment. The AJ found that, while most of the alleged harassment
referred to or related to Complainant’s sex, the undisputed evidence
established that the conduct and statements were motivated by
Complainant’s perceived role in causing the local union to be placed under
trusteeship and the local union officers to be removed.

Local union officials suggested that the local was placed under trusteeship
because Complainant was sleeping with district union officials or because
district union officials wanted to sleep with Complainant, and they called
Complainant whore, liar, and snitch. Union members asked Complainant if
she was dating the Union Trustee and asked the Union Trustee if he was
“fucking” Complainant. Complainant found flyers on an Agency bulletin
board suggesting that, during district union training in Hawaii, Complainant
was partying with the Union Trustee and other district union officials. A
stranger approached Complainant at work and asked if she was “fucking that
new union guy who took over.” Complainant found a threatening note on her
desk that threatened both Complainant and her family. The note referred to
Complainant as a snitch but also referred to Complainant as a “District 12
slut” and a “bitch.” Considering these instances collectively, the AJ found
that, while offensive, this harassment was not sufficiently severe or
pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment for a reasonable person
in Complainant’s circumstances. We disagree.

The AJ relied on the Commission’s decision in Janay K. Like Complainant, in
Janay K., the complainant was the subject of rumors, including a rumor that
she was sleeping with a married police officer. The complainant learned
about the rumor and also heard about it online. The complainant’s male
coworker argued with her, demeaned her and disrespected her, called her a
“cunt” when they had a disagreement, and told new agents that whatever
advice complainant provided was “stupid.” Another male coworker publicly
stated that the Resident Agent in Charge of his office was “banging” a
female agent, and the complainant was one of only two female agents in the
office.

We found in Janay K. that, even if we accepted that the conduct occurred as
alleged by complainant, the undisputed evidence and even some of
complainant’s statements showed that the alleged incidents were more likely
the result of workplace disputes and petty jealousy between Complainant
and the male coworker.
                                     30                         2022003833

We also found that the male coworker’s actions were insufficiently severe or
pervasive to constitute a hostile work environment and that there was no
evidence that his conduct unreasonably interfered with complainant’s job
performance. The record reflected that these were isolated incidents
stemming from routine workplace conflicts and, while the complainant was
undoubtedly offended by the rumors that she was having an affair with a
police officer, the record showed that this sort of gossip was common in the
workplace regardless of the sex of the subject of the gossip. We found that
the weight of the evidence did not establish that the alleged harassment was
motivated by the complainant’s sex.

Here, in contrast, there is no evidence of pervasive gossip about the sex
lives of anyone other than Complainant. Some men, such as the Union
Trustee and the Union Sergeant-at-Arms, were accused of sleeping with
Complainant or wanting to sleep with Complainant. However, there is no
evidence in the record that anyone, male or female, was asked about
sleeping or wanting to sleep with anyone other than Complainant. There is
no evidence that, other than the photo from Complainant’s Facebook that
was accompanied by comments making accusations against Complainant,
anyone else’s photos or social media posts were posted on an Agency
bulletin board. There is no evidence in the record that anyone other than
Complainant received threatening notes at their desk.

We also find that the AJ erred in analyzing the pornographic flyer separately
from the instances of harassment that occurred in 2017. The record reflects
that the pornographic flyer listed the names of the Union Trustee and the
Union VP, although we note that the flyer listed Complainant’s full name
twice, included her first name in a comment, and also included her actual
cell phone number. The men’s phone numbers were not included on the
flyer. The men’s names were only listed once, and their names appeared off
to the side. In contrast, Complainant’s name appeared in the center of the
pornographic image.

Upon review, we find that the preponderance of the evidence in the record
establishes that this harassment was based on Complainant’s sex. Although
Complainant may have first attracted the ire of some former local union
executive board members because of her perceived role in having the local
union placed in trusteeship, the evidence in the record reflects that the
harassment was based on Complainant’s sex.
                                      31                          2022003833

While others, such as the Union Trustee and the Union Sergeant-at-Arms,
were also asked about their sexual activities and subjected to comments
about their sexual activities, the questions and comments focused on the
individuals’ sexual activities with Complainant. Accordingly, Complainant has
established the second and third prongs of a prima facie case of harassment.

We further find that Complainant has established the fourth prong of a prima
facie case of harassment, that the harassment had the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with her work performance and/or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment. In Harris v. Forklift
Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993), the Supreme Court reaffirmed the
holding of Meritor Sav. Bank v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 67 (1986), that
harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the
conditions of the complainant's employment. Thus, not all claims of
harassment are actionable. In determining that a working environment is
hostile, factors to consider are the frequency of the alleged discriminatory
conduct, its severity, whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, and
if it unreasonably interferes with an employee’s work performance. Sulema
B. v. Dep't of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 2021002728 (Sept. 2,
2021) (citing Harris, 510 U.S. at 21).

Here, the harassment began in July 2017, and copies of the pornographic
flyer were found in the workplace through at least April 2018. While the
harassment initially consisted of offensive comments from fellow local union
officials, the harassment escalated. A stranger approached her about one of
the rumors. Someone posted an image from Complainant’s Facebook with an
added derogatory message on the bulletin board. Complainant found an
anonymous death threat on her desk, which threatened both Complainant
and her family, and this incident was threatening, hostile, and intimidating.
Subsequently, a pornographic flyer was disseminated in the workplace with
Complainant’s name and cell phone number and a statement that the
graphic image was “actual footage” of Complainant. As the AJ found, the
flyer was highly offensive, and we also find that the flyer was humiliating
and degrading. After the discovery of the flyer, Complainant had to take
extended medical leave. Here, we conclude that Complainant has established
that she was subjected to harassment based on sex, including threats of
violence against Complainant and her family and the dissemination of the
graphic flyer with her name and phone number, and that the harassment
was sufficiently severe that a reasonable person in Complainant’s
circumstances would find the working environment hostile.
                                      32                          2022003833

Accordingly, we consider whether the Agency is liable for the sexual
harassment. Because the identity of the individual(s) who accosted
Complainant in the stairwell, posted the documents on the bulletin board,
put the threatening letter on Complainant’s desk, and disseminated the
graphic flyer, we will apply the standard for coworker harassment. Under
this standard, the Agency is responsible for acts of harassment in the
workplace where the Agency (or its agents) knew or should have known of
the conduct, unless it can establish an affirmative defense by showing that it
took immediate and appropriate corrective action. An appropriate remedial
action will necessarily depend on the particular facts of the case, such as the
severity and persistence of the harassment and the effectiveness of any
initial remedial steps. See Caroline B. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC
Appeal No. 2020000978 (Sept. 16, 2021). Simply initiating corrective action
or taking remedial action that only has a temporary or partial impact on the
alleged harassment is insufficient to establish an affirmative defense of
immediate and appropriate corrective action. See id.

The AJ found that liability could not be imputed to the Agency regarding the
flyer because, when the flyer was discovered, the Plant Manager called the
MCPD CID, asked security personnel to save surveillance camera footage
and to print access logs, and sent an email to the workforce on February 13,
2018, addressing the flyers as well as the August 2017 note. The AJ also
noted that the Plant Manager offered to relocate Complainant to a secure
building with limited access but that Complainant declined to be relocated.

As discussed above, we find that the AJ erred in analyzing the flyer on its
own. The fact that the Plant Manager’s February 13, 2018, email referenced
the August 2017 threatening note and stated that management was
“appalled by these continued actions” reflects that the Agency had been
aware of the harassment and that, despite the Agency’s efforts to address
the harassment after the discovery of the note, the harassment had
continued. Essentially, the Agency was aware that the corrective action it
took after the August 2017 harassment had not been effective, yet in
February 2018 it took the same corrective actions that it was aware had
been ineffective. Moreover, the undisputed evidence in the record reflects
that, even after the Plant Manager sent the February 13th email, copies of
the flyer continued to be found in the workplace. Although the employees
who found copies of the flyer reported the matter to their supervisors, the
record does not reflect that this information was forwarded to CID. Finally,
while the Agency offered to relocate Complainant to a different building,
Complainant explained that she would not feel safe working by herself in an
isolated space away from her supervisors and coworkers.
                                      33                          2022003833

As a rule, an agency should make every reasonable effort to minimize the
burden or negative consequences to an employee who complains of
harassment. See Enforcement Guidance on Harassment in the Workplace at
§ IV.3.b.ii. Moreover, the record reflects that employees continued to find
copies of the flyer while Complainant was out of the workplace on extended
medical leave. We find that the Agency is liable for the sexual harassment
because it has not shown that it took immediate and appropriate corrective
action. Accordingly, we reverse the Agency’s final action finding that
Complainant did not establish that she was subjected to sexual harassment.

Retaliatory Harassment

Reprisal claims are considered with a broad view of coverage. See Burlington
Northern and Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 67-68 (2006); see
also, Carroll v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Request No. 05970939 (Apr. 4,
2000). Retaliatory actions which can be challenged are not restricted to
those which affect a term or condition of employment. Id. Rather, a
complainant is protected from any discrimination that is reasonably likely to
deter protected activity. Id.; see also, Carroll, supra. On the one hand, petty
slights and trivial annoyances are not actionable. On the other, adverse
actions or threats to take adverse actions such as reprimands, negative
evaluations, and harassment are actionable. EEOC Enforcement Guidance on
Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, § II.B (Aug 25,
2016). To ultimately prevail on a claim of retaliatory harassment,
Complainant must show that she was subjected to conduct sufficient to
dissuade a “reasonable person” from making or supporting a charge of
discrimination. See Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Ry. Co., 548 U.S. at
57; EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, §
II(B)(3) & n. 137. Only if both elements are present, retaliatory motivation
and a chilling effect on protected EEO activity, will the question of Agency
liability for reprisal-based harassment present itself. See Janeen S. v. Dep’t
of Commerce, EEOC Appeal No. 0120160024 (Dec. 20, 2017).

Given the importance of maintaining “unfettered access to [the] statutory
remedial mechanisms” in the anti-retaliation provisions in Title VII, our cases
have found that a broad range of actions can fall into this category.
Burlington N. and Santa Fe Ry. Co., 548 U.S. at 64 quoting Robinson v. Shell
Oil Co., 519 U.S. 337, 346 (1997). For example, we have held that a
supervisor threatening an employee by saying “What goes around, comes
around” when discussing an EEO complaint constitutes an adverse action.
Vincent v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120072908 (Aug. 3, 2009),
request for recon. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520090654 (Dec. 16, 2010).
                                     34                          2022003833

We have also found that a supervisor attempting to counsel an employee
against pursuing an EEO complaint “as a friend,” even if intended innocently,
is an adverse action. Woolf v. Dep’t of Energy, EEOC Appeal No.
0120083727 (June 4, 2009) (violation found when a labor management
specialist told the complainant, “as a friend,” that her EEO claim would
polarize the office).

Here, it is undisputed that, on January 4, 2018, Complainant was in the
Finance Office helping the Financial Management Analyst complete a task. It
is also undisputed that the Finance Supervisor directed Complainant to leave
the Finance Office because she had filed a hostile work environment
complaint while working in the Finance Office. On appeal, the Agency
characterizes Complainant’s hostile work environment complaint as a non-
EEO harassment claim in which Complainant expressed concerns about her
safety in the Finance Office. The record reflects that the Finance Supervisor
had not supervised Complainant, who was transferred out of the Finance
Office based on her own request.

According to the Agency, Complainant cannot establish a prima facie case of
harassment based on reprisal because Complainant’s prior protected EEO
activity was from 2015 and because the Finance Supervisor was not aware
of Complainant’s 2015 EEO complaint. The Agency argues that the Finance
Supervisor asked Complainant to leave the Finance Office not in retaliation
for filing a complaint but because her hostile work environment complaint
had raised safety concerns.

Complainant alleged that the Finance Supervisor yelled, “What are you doing
in here? You’re not allowed in here. Get out, so long as there is a hostile
work environment you cannot come in here!” ROI at 96. The Finance
Supervisor stated that she told Complainant that, due to the hostile work
environment complaint she had filed, she should not come into the Finance
Office for her own safety, adding that “I was only looking out for her and
others.” ROI at 160. According to the Finance Supervisor, she wanted to
make sure Complainant “was not putting herself in a situation that could
cause a hostile situation and looking out for her as well as others within the
Finance Office.” ROI at 160. The Financial Management Analyst averred that
the Finance Supervisor yelled at Complainant that she was no longer
welcome in the Finance Office “due to an ongoing EEO complaint.” ROI at
164. Finance Office, the Finance Supervisor chastised the Financial
Management Analyst, stating that Complainant should never “come into
Finance again due to a pending EEO investigation.” ROI at 164-65.
                                     35                          2022003833

According to the Supervisory Production Controller, the Finance Supervisor
stated that she asked Complainant to leave the Finance Office “due to a
pending hostile work environment” complaint and that, due to Complainant’s
harassment allegation, it would be in her best interest that Complainant “not
put herself into a situation.”

On January 4, 2018, Complainant’s EEO complaint, which she filed on
September 28, 2017, was pending. Based on the record, we are unable to
determine whether the Agency was still processing the Hostile Work Place
Report that Complainant completed on August 17, 2017, or the earlier
hostile work environment claim that Complainant submitted in May 2017
that led to her being assigned out of the Finance Office. However, according
to the record, the Agency’s EEO/Anti-Harassment and Sexual Harassment
Policy requires that, within 24 hours of receiving an initial allegation of
harassment, a supervisor must report the allegation up the chain of
command, fill out a Harassment Advisory Notice Form, conduct a preliminary
inquiry (PI) into the circumstances surrounding the allegations, and submit
the form to LOGCOM. ROI at 198-99. The policy also states that
“confidentiality of any individual bringing up a claim of harassment or
discrimination will be maintained to the fullest extent possible and they will
be free from reprisal for raising such an issue.” ROI at 199.

Unless the Agency delayed in addressing her hostile work environment
complaint, it is unlikely that Complainant’s May 2017 harassment complaint
was still pending on January 4, 2018, which was months after she was
reassigned away from the Finance Office. Moreover, Complainant was
reassigned based on the request associated with her harassment complaint
before the Finance Supervisor became the supervisor of the Finance Office.
Accordingly, Complainant’s only “pending” complaints on January 4, 2018,
were her current EEO complaint and possibly her August 17, 2017, Hostile
Work Place complaint, which raised allegations of harassment based on sex.
We therefore find that, in directing Complainant to leave the Finance Office
because of her pending hostile work environment complaint, the Finance
Supervisor was referring to Complainant’s protected EEO activity. Moreover,
in mentioning this complaint in front of the Financial Management Analyst,
the Finance Supervisor disclosed Complainant’s protected EEO activity in
violation of Title VII as well as the Agency’s internal policy, which assures
the confidentiality of someone raising a harassment or discrimination to the
fullest extent possible. Moreover, although Complainant was transferred out
of the Finance Office at her own request, she was not barred from the
Finance Office.
                                      36                          2022003833

Complainant explained that she had a habit of helping out Finance
employees and that, in her new role as a Management Assistant in the
Program Management Division, she worked with the Finance Office on
certain tasks. According to Complainant, after the Finance Supervisor told
her she could not be in the Finance Office, it made completing some of her
work more difficult, and sometimes she felt like she had to walk on
eggshells. We find that the Finance Supervisor’s actions could dissuade a
reasonable person from engaging in protected EEO activity. Accordingly, the
Finance Supervisor subjected Complainant to reprisal when she disclosed her
protected EEO activity to the Financial Management Analyst and when she
prohibited Complainant from entering the Finance Office.

We next consider whether the Agency is liable for this harassment. In Vance
v. Ball State Univ., 570 U.S. 421, 133 S. Ct. 2434, 2443 (2013), the
Supreme Court held that an employee is a “supervisor” if “the employer has
empowered that employee to take tangible employment actions against the
victim, i.e., to effect a ‘significant change in employment status, such as
hiring, firing, failing to promote, reassignment with significantly different
responsibilities, or a decision causing a significant change in benefits.’” The
Finance Supervisor was not Complainant’s supervisor, so we will apply the
standard for coworker harassment. The record reflects that, upon returning
to her work area, Complainant reported the incident to the Supervisory
Production Controller. We find that the Agency is liable for the Finance
Supervisor’s retaliation because there is no evidence that the Agency took
any action in response. See Candice B. v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No.
2023005066 (Dec. 20, 2023) (finding agency liable for retaliatory comments
because there was no evidence the agency took any action to respond). We
therefore reverse the Agency’s final action finding that Complainant did not
establish that she was subjected to harassment based on reprisal.

                                CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the issuance of
a decision without a hearing but REVERSE the Agency’s final action finding
no discrimination based on sex and reprisal and REMAND the matter to the
Agency for remedial action in accordance with this decision and the ORDER
below.
                                      37                          2022003833

                                   ORDER

The Agency shall take the following remedial actions:

     1. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued,
        the Agency shall conduct and complete a supplemental investigation
        to determine whether Complainant is entitled to compensatory
        damages for this violation of Title VII. In so doing, the Agency shall:

             a. Issue a notice to Complainant of her right to submit
                evidence based our guidance in Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy,
                EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993) and request
                evidence from Complainant in support of compensatory
                damages. 4 The Notice shall provide Complainant with thirty
                (30) calendar days to respond (with an option and
                instructions to request an extension in the case of
                extenuating circumstances). Complainant has a duty to
                cooperate with Agency’s investigation to determine
                compensatory damages, including responding to agency
                requests for documentation or completing agency forms.

             b. Issue a final agency decision (“Compensatory Damages
                FAD”) based on the findings of the supplemental
                investigation. The Compensatory Damages FAD shall state
                the amount (if any) of compensatory damages owed to
                Complainant and explain how the Agency determined that
                amount. The Compensatory Damages FAD shall include
                appeal rights to the Commission.

4
  To establish entitlement to compensatory damages, the evidence must
show a causal relationship between the Agency’s discriminatory action and
any pecuniary (monetary) or non-pecuniary losses/harm experienced by
Complainant.
For more information on evidence to determine compensatory damages:
EEOC Management Directive 110, Ch. 11 § VII (Aug. 5, 2015), available at
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/directives/md-110_chapter_11.cfm (provides
the types of compensatory damages available under EEOC statutes and
“Objective Evidence” of entitlement); and N. Thompson, Compensatory
Damages in the Federal Sector: An Overview, EEOC Digest Vol. XVI, No. 1
(Winter 2005) available at https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/digest/xvi-
1.cfm#article (explains Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy under the subsection
“Proof of Damages”).
                                     38                          2022003833

        Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Compensatory
        Damages FAD is issued, the Agency shall pay Complainant the
        amount of compensatory damages it determined are owed. If there
        is a dispute over the exact amount of compensatory damages
        owed, the Agency shall pay the undisputed amount to Complainant.
        If Complainant disagrees with the agency’s award, they may
        challenge the Agency’s decision on the amount of compensatory
        damages by filing an appeal of the Compensatory Damages FAD
        with the Commission. Instructions on how to appeal, including the
        deadline to file, will be included in the appeal rights portion of the
        Compensatory Damages FAD.

     2. Within ninety (90) calendar days from the date this decision is
        issued, the Agency shall determine how many hours of leave
        (annual, sick, leave without pay, etc.) Complainant used from July
        6, 2017, through either the date the Agency effectively remedied
        the harassment or the date this decision is issued as a result of the
        discriminatory harassment and restore that amount to Complainant.
        Complainant must demonstrate a causal nexus between the
        discriminatory harassment and the need to take leave. The Agency
        shall provide the Compliance Officer with a printout or statement by
        an appropriate Agency official, identifying the amount and type of
        leave restored.

     3. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is
        issued, the individuals identified in this decision as the Plant
        Manager, the Finance Supervisor, the Union President, the Union
        Vice President, 5 Employee-1, Employee-2, Employee-3, and
        Employee-4, the Branch Manager, and the Supervisory Production
        Controller shall complete four hours of in-person or interactive
        training on the Agency’s obligations under Title VII. The training
        shall include an emphasis on preventing and correcting workplace
        harassment, reprisal, and the extent to which EEO activity must be
        kept confidential.

        For assistance in obtaining the necessary training, the Agency may
        contact the Commission’s Outreach, Training and Engagement
        Division via email, at FederalTrainingandOutreach@eeoc.gov.

5
  Although the Union President and the Union Vice President are identified in
the decision by their former union executive board titles, the Agency shall
provide training to them in their capacity as civilian employees.
                                     39                         2022003833

        The Agency shall provide the Compliance Officer with proof of
        attendance, as well as the contents and materials it used for the
        training. If these individuals have left the Agency’s employ, the
        Agency shall furnish documentation of their departure dates.

     4. Within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date
        this decision is issued, the Agency shall consider disciplining the
        Plant Manager, the Finance Supervisor, the Union President, the
        Union Vice President, 6 Employee-1, Employee-2, Employee-3, and
        Employee-4, the Branch Manager, and the Supervisory Production
        Controller for the sexual harassment and harassment based on
        reprisal in violation of Title VII found to have occurred in this
        decision. The Commission does not consider training to be
        disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the
        Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary
        action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not
        to take disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its
        decision not to impose discipline. If these individuals have left the
        Agency’s employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of their
        departure dates.

     5. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is
        issued, the Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the
        section listed below, entitled “Posting Order.” The Agency shall
        provide the Compliance Officer with the original signed and dated
        notice, reflecting the dates that the notice was posted, along with
        evidence that the notice was physically posted at the facility and
        electronically.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital
format as provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the
Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be submitted via the Federal
Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further, the
report must include evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.




6
  Although the Union President and the Union Vice President are identified in
the decision by their former union executive board titles, the Agency shall
consider disciplining them in their capacity as civilian employees.
                                     40                         2022003833

                         POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Production Plant Barstow, Marine Depot
Maintenance Command facility in Barstow, California copies of the attached
notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly
authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and
electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this
decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in
conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that
said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The
original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as
directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's
Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period.
The report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal
Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                        ATTORNEY’S FEES (H0124)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29
C.F.R. § 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), they are entitled to an award of reasonable
attorney's fees incurred in the processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid by the Agency. The
attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations
-- within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency
shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.501.

       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the
Commission’s corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar
days of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall
submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in
the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance
docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all
compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final
compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting
documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
                                      41                          2022003833

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the
Complainant may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the right to file a civil
action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement.          See 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the
Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in
accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.”
29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in
42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files
a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of
the orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result
in the referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).
                                     42                          2022003833

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative
processing of your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you
have the right to file such action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your
complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you
file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that
person by their full name and official title.
                                       43                          2022003833

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work.        Filing a civil action will
terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.


          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0124)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also
requires the Agency to continue its administrative processing of a portion of
your complaint. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the
date that you receive this decision on both that portion of your complaint
which the Commission has affirmed and that portion of the complaint which
has been remanded for continued administrative processing.              In the
alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty
(180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency,
or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the Agency issues its
final decision on your complaint. If you file a civil action, you must name as
the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests.
                                       44                          2022003833

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 19, 2024
Date
