           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Dante B., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                              Lloyd J. Austin III,
                                  Secretary,
                            Department of Defense
                  (National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency),
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2022004225

                         Agency No. NGA-0035-2021

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s July 7, 2022, final decision concerning an equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the reasons set forth herein, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                              ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s final decision properly found no discrimination regarding
Complainant’s complaint alleging a hostile work environment claim.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                   2                    2022004225


                               BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Supervisor
Installation Management Officer, Quality Assurance Lead in Springfield,
Virginia.

On July 1, 2021, Complainant initiated EEO Counselor contact. Report of
Investigation (ROI) at 36. Informal efforts to resolve his concerns were
unsuccessful

On November 9, 2021, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that
the Agency discriminated against him based on race (African-American) and
color (Brown).

On December 6, 2021, the Agency issued a partial acceptance letter regarding
the formal complaint. Therein, the Agency determined that the formal
complaint was comprised of the following claims:

     1. On June 29, 2021, Complainant alleged that he received his FY 2021
        Close-out Evaluation scores and they were lowered from the previous
        evaluation;

     2. On April 17, 2021, Complainant alleged, that his named first-level
        supervisor,  (S1) 2  informed   co-workers    and    management
        Complainant was being removed from his role as a supervisor due to
        performance management issues;


     3. On March 17, 2021, he alleged that he was informed by S1 that he
        would no longer hold a supervisory position and that he was being
        reorganized into a non-supervisory position.


     4. On December 11, 2020, he alleged that while serving as a panel
        hiring manager, S1 repeatedly asked for the list of candidates, their
        resumes and the order they were ranked;




2 S1 identified his race as “primarily Northern European and American Indian”

and his color as “medium sometimes burns, always tans.” ROI at 457.
                                    3                    2022004225

      5. On December 9, 2020, he alleged, in a Performance Management
         Review Board Meeting, he was told to change his reporting colors to
         reflect S1’s preference; and


      6. On October 6, 2020, he alleged that he questions S1’s decision to not
         submit two of his subordinates for Agency achievement awards.


      7. On April 22, 2021, [Complainant alleged he was placed into a Safety
         position from the reorganization, which was a non-supervisory
         position. 3

The Agency set forth it would not investigate claim (7) because Complainant,
subsequent to the filing of the formal complaint, notified the Agency that this
claim was no longer valid and that he was able to retain his supervisory status
in his new safety position. 4 Report of Investigation (ROI) at 78.

The Agency accepted claim (1) for investigation as a discrete act. However,
the Agency dismissed claims (2) - (6) for untimely EEO Counselor contact,
when viewing them as discrete acts, reasoning that Complainant initiated EEO
contact on these matters on July 1, 2021, outside of the applicable time
period. 5 Final Agency Decision (FAD) at 3. The Agency, however, accepted
incidents (1) - (6) as a claim of discriminatory harassment. ROI at 79.

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ).




3 The claims are re-numbered herein for ease of reference.


4 Complainant does not contest that he informed the Agency that this claim

was no longer valid. Thus, we decline to address this matter further herein.

5
 The Agency also dismissed claims (2), (4), (5), and (6) for failure to state a
claim when viewing these matters as discrete acts. Complaint File at 79.
Complainant does not expressly contest, on appeal, the Agency’s procedural
dismissal of specified claims; thus, we decline to further address herein the
procedural dismissals.
                                    4                    2022004225

According to the Agency’s final decision, Complainant requested a final
decision. 6 FAD at 3.

The Agency found no discrimination. Regarding claim (1), his FY 2021
evaluation, the Agency found that S1 stated that the rating he assigned were
based on Complainant’s performance and thus, articulated a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for claim (1). FAD at 10. The Agency further found
that Complainant failed to establish that the Agency’s articulated reason for
claim (1) was pretext for discrimination.       The Agency reasoned that
Complainant did not present comparators who were employees outside of his
protected EEO classes, who were rated higher for accomplishing similar work.
FAD at 13.      The Agency’s final decision further sets forth that while
Complainant received higher ratings in prior years, these prior ratings do not
support an inference that discrimination was the motive for the lower rating
at issue. FAD at 13.

Regarding the reassignment (claim 3), the Agency’s final decision set forth
that Complainant was ultimately moved to a Safety position and was able to
retain his supervisory status. FAD at 12. Regarding S1’s desire to reassign
Complainant, the Agency found that S1 did not believe Complainant possessed
strong leaderships skills for the Quality Assurance (QA) team but had a strong
background for the Safety Program. FAD at 11. The Agency found that
Complainant failed to establish that S1’s reason             was pretext for
discrimination. FAD at 11.

Based on the foregoing, the Agency’s final decision found that, under a hostile
work environment analysis, Complainant did not establish that incidents (1)
and (3) were based on his protected classes. The Agency’s final decision
further found that the Complainant did not establish that the other alleged
incidents of harassment were based on his protected EEO classes. FAD 15-
17.




6 The record does not contain a copy of Complainant’s request for a final
agency decision. However, Complainant does not contest, on appeal, that he
requested a final agency decision. FAD at 13.
                                     5                     2022004225

                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant does not submit a statement or brief in support of his appeal.

The Agency does not submit a statement or brief in opposition to
Complainant’s appeal.

                            STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).            See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                   ANALYSIS

Claim (1)-FY 2021 Evaluation-Disparate Treatment Analysis

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first
enunciated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For
complainant to prevail, he must first establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to
an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor
in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802;
Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then
shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. See Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253
(1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the
ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the
evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St.
Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

A complainant may establish a prima facie case of discrimination by
demonstrating: 1) membership in a protected group; 2) that complainant was
adversely affected by management’s personnel decision or action; and 3) that
                                   6                    2022004225

complainant was treated less favorably than similarly situated individuals
outside of complainant’s protected groups. See e.g., Ricardo K. v. Dep't of
Veterans Affairs, EEOC Decision No. 2019004809, (Dec. 10, 2020)
(complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination because
complainant has not provided any evidence or facts that give rise to
an inference of unlawful discrimination based on complainant's protected
classes). Alternatively, a complainant may establish a prima facie case by
establishing the first two elements above and that there is some other
evidentiary link between membership in the protected class and the adverse
employment action. Complainant v. Dep't of Navy, EEOC Decision No.
0120113118, (Aug. 14, 2014) (prima facie case includes comparator element
or it “must present other evidence that supports an inference that the agency
was motivated by unlawful discrimination.”) (citing Alonzo v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0720070032 (Feb. 4, 2008)).

Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on
race and color regarding claim (1). Complainant is a member of specified
protected classes and was subjected to an action that may be deemed
adverse, Complainant did not prove that he was treated less favorably than
members outside of his protected classes regarding claim (1). Moreover, he
did not establish any other evidentiary link between the adverse action and
his protected classes. While Complainant asserted that he believed S1 was
uncomfortable working with African American males, this assertion alone does
not establish an evidentiary link between his protected classes and his
evaluation rating.

The Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions
regarding claim (1). The record reflects that Complainant received a rating of
“Successful” or “3.0” for FY 2021. ROI at 348. The evaluation drafted by S1
contained comments regarding areas of improvement. For example, S1 found
that Complainant did not provide a revised Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan
(QASP) and did not meet monthly reporting requirements. ROI at 349-353.
The record also contains an affidavit from S1. Therein, S1 states that
Complainant’s evaluation was based on his performance and during the mid-
year evaluation, he discussed with Complainant areas that he was not
fulfilling. ROI at 464-465.

Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that S1’s
articulated reasons for his actions were pretext for discrimination. We concur
with the Agency’s final decision that “Complainant has not provided any
evidence that the work accomplishments he cited in the record would have
warranted him a higher rating.
                                     7                     2022004225

For instance, Complainant presents no comparators who were outside of his
protected group and who were rated Excellent or Outstanding for
accomplishing the same or similar work activities. He does not submit any
evidence that he re-wrote the QASP as he alleged, such as submitting the
original QASP and the QASP that encompassed the changes he and his team
made…” See FAD at 13.

Hostile Work Environment Analysis

To establish a prima facie case of discriminatory hostile work environment,
Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, the existence
of five elements: (1) that he is a member of a statutorily protected class; (2)
that he was subjected to unwelcome conduct related to his protected class;
(3) that the harassment complained of was based on his protected class; (4)
that the harassment had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
his work performance and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive
work environment; and (5) that there is a basis for imputing liability to the
employer. See Celine B. v. Dep't of Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001961
(Sept. 21, 2020); Humphrey v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01965238
(Oct. 16, 1998).

Complainant did not establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
actions at issue were based on his protected classes. Regarding claim (1), as
discussed above in the disparate treatment analysis section, the Agency
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the rating S1 issued to
Complainant, which Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of
the evidence was pretext for discrimination.

Regarding incident (2), that S1 made comments to other employees regarding
Complainant’s performance, we concur with the Agency’s final decision that
the record is devoid of evidence that any such comments were based on his
protected classes. S1, in his affidavit, acknowledged that he had some
conversations regarding Complainant’s performance with other management
officials. Specifically, S1 stated “I did communicate with [named management
officials] about my assessment regarding [Complainant’s] inability to lead the
QA team effectively. It was my opinion that was due to his responsibilities
not being properly aligned with his strengths and that moving him to a
[Safety] position would better align his abilities with his responsibilities…” ROI
at 463. The record is devoid of evidence that S1’s comments about
Complainant’s performance were based on his protected classes.
                                     8                     2022004225

Regarding incident (3), Complainant being informed by S1 that he was being
moved to a non-supervisory position, S1 stated that he told Complainant that
the QA Team needed stronger technical leadership skills. ROI at 462. S1
further asserted that the “misalignment of strengths and responsibilities led
to my recommendation for [Complainant’s] reassignment from QA to [Safety].
The fact that this would lead him to being moved into a non-supervisory
position was an unfortunate side effect…” 7 ROI at 463.

Regarding incident (4), S1 asking for the resumes for candidates in which
Complainant was the hiring manager, S1 stated that he was trying to get this
information to plan for the future in order to use their talents and abilities.
ROI at 461. S1 stated that a career services representative responded that
the paperwork was still being processed and offers had not been made, so the
information could not be shared. S1 asserted that he did not pursue the
matter further and assumed he would receive the information once the
process was complete. ROI at 460.

Regarding incident (5), that S1, in a meeting, wanted Complainant to change
his rating for a contractor’s performance, S1 stated that it is his responsibility
as the Program Manager to provide feedback to the Contractor that is clear
and consistent and he regularly challenges the feedback individuals provide.
ROI at 459. In the meeting at issue, S1 stated that Complainant provided a
slide for Custodial Services indicating a yellow status but only gave positive
feedback and no negative feedback. S1 stated that yellow status indicates
some areas of concern. ROI at 459. S1 stated that Complainant ultimately
submitted a revised slide that while still in yellow status contained some
negative feedback. ROI at 459. The record contains a copy of the slides for
Custodial Services. The initial performance slide for Custodial Services
submitted by Complainant had a yellow status but no issues or concerns listed.
ROI at 488. However, the revised slide, submitted by Complainant, had
maintained the yellow status but listed a concern/issue. ROI at 492.

The record also contains an affidavit from an attendee at the meeting who
stated that the purpose of these meetings is to ensure that the government’s
evaluation of the contractor’s performance is clear, consistent, and properly
supported. ROI at 562. In addition, this attendee of the meeting in question
stated that he had discussions in these types of meetings with S1 on the
appropriate status bar color for the areas under his supervision and asserted
that sometimes we would change the color, sometimes they would keep it the

7 The record reflects that Complainant ultimately kept his supervisory status

in the new Safety position in which he was placed. ROI at 412.
                                    9                    2022004225

same after the discussion, and sometimes they would edit or add comments.
ROI at 562. Another attendee of the meeting indicated that two other ratings
were changed after discussions. This attendee supported S1’s assertion that
the initial slide submitted by Complainant had a yellow status but no issues or
concerns listed. 8 ROI at 628.

Regarding incident (6), S1 questioning whether Complainant was
recommending his subordinates for performance awards, S1 stated one of
Complainant’s subordinates was highly rated and was not submitted for an
award, which he found unusual. 9 ROI at 458. S1 stated that when he inquired
about this matter to Complainant, he responded defensively in a manner that
S1 was questioning his supervisory skills and ultimately decided not to push
the matter further. ROI at 458.

Based on the foregoing, we find that Complainant has not established, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the incidents at issue were based on his
protected classes.

                                CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:




8 While we acknowledge that one of Complainant’s co-workers believed S1’s

conduct in the meeting towards Complainant constituted discrimination (ROI
at 594), we find that the preponderance of the record, as discussed above,
supported S1’s testimony regarding this matter that he was seeking to have
the performance status for contractors be clearly supported and consistent.

9 S1 stated that he sent an email to Complainant about reconsidering one of

his two subordinates at the time for an award because that particular
employee had a higher score than the other employee who was also a
subordinate of Complainant’s. ROI at 223.
                                    10                     2022004225

      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.
                                     11                     2022004225

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests.
                                    12                     2022004225

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                          __      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 25, 2024
Date
