             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Chanelle B., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Louis DeJoy,
                                     Postmaster General,
                                  United States Postal Service
                                  (Field Areas and Regions),
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022004760

                                 Agency No. 4G-300-0338-21

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s August 8, 2022, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency correctly concluded that Complainant did not establish that she was
subjected to discrimination based on her race/color (African American/Black), and in reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity when, on unspecified dates, the Postmaster singled her out when he
failed to offer her a detail opportunity at her local station.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier, 01/0,
at the Agency’s Post Office, in Rome, Georgia.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2022004760

On December 16, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected
her to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the bases of race/color (African
American/Black), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when, on unspecified dates, the
Postmaster singled her out when he failed to offer her a detail opportunity at her local station.

Complainant named the Postmaster at the Rome Post Office (Caucasian European-American)
(Postmaster) as the official primarily responsible for the alleged discrimination. The Postmaster
was aware of her color. Complainant stated she has been with the Agency over 20 years and that
her work record is great. Complainant asserted that she participated in EEO activity in October
2018, but she was unsure if the Postmaster was aware of her protected activity. The Postmaster
testified that he was not aware that Complainant was involved in EEO activity prior to this
complaint.

Complainant averred she informed the Postmaster of her wish for a higher-level detail in 2017,
but she did not get a detail until 2019, and then only at facilities that necessitated long commutes
and inconvenient hours. She claimed that, since May 18, 2019, the Postmaster failed to offer
Complainant a detail opportunity at her assigned station. She stated she was assigned a detail
from October 2019 through December 2019, but the detail was at the East Point location which
was 78 miles from her local facility.

Complainant identified several Caucasian employees who received a detail assignment at the
Rome Post Office. One identified employee (CW1) (Caucasian, unknown EEO activity) served
as 204B Supervisor. Complainant stated that CW1 started at the Rome Post Office in 2018 and
received promotional opportunities. Complainant also identified a second employee (CW2)
(Caucasian, protected EEO activity) who received detail assignments at the Rome Post Office.
She stated CW2 also started after Complainant and was also given the opportunity to move up.
Complainant identified two other co-workers (CW3) (Caucasian, unknown EEO activity) (CW4)
(Caucasian, unknown EEO activity) who were given opportunities to move up at Rome.
Additionally, Complainant identified three African American employees who were offered detail
assignments at Rome. The record reveals that one of these African American employees also
had prior protected EEO activity.

In response, the Postmaster stated that, since May 2019, 204B Supervisor detail assignments
became available at Rome. The Postmaster identified CW3 and CW4 as the employees who
received the 204B detail assignments lasting six months to a year. The Postmaster noted that
Complainant had previously been given at least two high-level opportunities at the Atlanta-
Hapeville and Dallas Stations and turned down a third in November 2021. Since Complainant
had had two prior detail opportunities, the Postmaster stated that he had to give other employees
the opportunity to serve in 204B details. Further, the Postmaster stated that the Dallas Postmaster
told him that when Complainant was on the detail to the Dallas Station, she did not seem to come
to be supervisor but rather “to socialize.” The Dallas Postmaster explained that Complainant had
attendance issues and had been tardy 56 percent of her scheduled workdays at the time. The
Postmaster averred that Complainant was not treated differently than the comparators and that
“[each co-worker] had to wait her turn for an opportunity to 204B, just as Complainant.”
                                               3                                    2022004760

The Postmaster identified three Caucasian carriers with unknown EEO activity who also asked
for 204B opportunities but were denied either because there were no opportunities at the time, or
someone asked before they did. In addition, the Postmaster identified a Black male carrier with
prior protected EEO activity who was provided a 204B opportunity at Rome.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that she was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. This
appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant's contentions on appeal mostly reiterate her allegations that the Postmaster was
motivated by discriminatory and retaliatory animus in denying her local detail opportunities.
Accordingly, Complainant requests that the Commission reverse the final decision.

                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                          ANALYSIS

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For the complainant to prevail, he or
she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited
consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). See also, Reeves v.
Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. at 142 (applying McDonnell Douglas analysis to
ADEA claim). The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason for its actions. See Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
                                               4                                    2022004760

Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to
persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of
a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

To establish a prima facie case of discrimination, a complainant must show that: (1) she is a
member of a protected group; (2) she suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) the
circumstances give rise to an inference of discrimination. We note that, although a complainant
bears the burden of establishing a “prima facie” case, Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine,
450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (1981), the requirements are “minimal,” St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks,
509 U.S. 502, 506 (1993), and complainant's burden is “not onerous.” Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253.

A complainant may establish a prima facie case of reprisal by showing that: (1) she engaged in a
protected activity; (2) the agency was aware of the protected activity; (3) subsequently, she was
subjected to adverse treatment by the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected
activity and the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Dep't of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No.
01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000).

Here, the Commission agrees with the Agency that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie
case of discrimination and reprisal. The record demonstrates that African American employees
were granted 204B opportunities at the Rome Post Office as well as employees who had engaged
in prior protected EEO activity. Further, Complainant has presented no evidence demonstrating
that the Postmaster was aware of her prior protected EEO activity at the time he made decisions
regarding detail assignments. As a result, Complainant has not established a prima facie case of
discrimination or reprisal.

Even had Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and reprisal, the
Commission finds that the record shows that the Agency had legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for its actions. The Postmaster explained that Complainant was not offered a detail
opportunity at her home station because she had previously been given two high level
opportunities and turned down another one on November 2021. The Postmaster added that he
had to give other employees opportunities to serve as a 204B. The Postmaster additionally
pointed to Complainant’s attendance and performance issues while at the Dallas Station.

As Complainant did not request a hearing, the Commission does not have the benefit of an
Administrative Judge's final credibility determinations after a hearing. Therefore, the
Commission can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented. The
Commission finds no persuasive evidence that Complainant's protected classes were a factor in
any of the Agency's actions. At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency's reasons were not the real
reasons and that the Agency acted on the basis of discriminatory or retaliatory animus.
Complainant failed to carry this burden.
                                                5                                    2022004760

Finally, to the extent that Complainant contends that she was subjected to a hostile work
environment with respect to the matters herein, the Commission concludes that a finding of a
hostile work environment is precluded by the Commission's determination that Complainant
failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by discriminatory
or retaliatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21,
2000). Therefore, the Commission finds that Complainant has not established that she was
subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile work environment as alleged.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s Final Decision.


                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                                6                                     2022004760

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).



               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a
request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.



                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                  7                                     2022004760

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                          Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 20, 2024
Date
