             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Greta F., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                        Janet L. Yellen,
                                           Secretary,
                                  Department of the Treasury
                                  (Internal Revenue Service),
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022003395

                                  Agency No. IRS-21-0678-F

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s May 10, 2022, final
decision concerning an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

Did the Agency’s final decision properly find no discrimination regarding Complainant’s claim
that she was subjected to a hostile work environment?

                                       BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Taxpayer Advocate in
Laguna Niguel, California.

On November 4, 2021, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her based on race (Hispanic) and national origin (Mexican).



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                    2022003395

By letter dated November 16, 2021, the Agency accepted the formal complaint for investigation
and framed the claims in the following fashion:

       Whether a co-worker who was an On-the-Job Instructor (OJI), as well as a Lead,
       subjected Complainant to harassment based on her race/national origin
       (Hispanic/Mexican) on multiple occasions beginning in June 2020 and continuing
       through July 2021 when, among other matters, the OJI/Lead:

       1.   Made fun of Complainant’s accent and said she disliked speaking to
            Complainant.

       2. Tried to sabotage Complainant’s work by creating a list of inventory late
          actions and expired casework, and purposely gave Complainant
          misinformation regarding how to process cases.

       3. Filled Complainant’s calendar with unrealistic appointments that not even
          experienced employees could complete.

       4. Advised Complainant’s manager to have Complainant process a fraudulent
          tax return.

After an investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), finding no discrimination.

Specifically, the Agency determined that “assuming [Complainant’s initial supervisor, S1] made
these and other similar comments [as set forth in incident (1)], the statements would be
unwelcome verbal conduct based on Complainant’s protected categories of race/national
origin/ethnicity.” Final Agency Decision (FAD) at 12. However, the Agency, in its final
decision, further set forth that:

       Complainant has produced no persuasive evidence that management’s actions
       described in [alleged incidents] 2, 3, and 4 were harassment based on her
       statutorily protected classes. Complainant’s uncorroborated statements that
       management was motivated by race/ethnicity and/or national origin to take the
       actions complained of are not sufficient to sustain her burden of showing
       harassment…Finally, we note that Complainant’s allegations of harassment were
       addressed through an internal anti-harassment inquiry, which did not substantiate
       Complainant’s claims.” FAD at 13.
                                                3                                    2022003395

The instant appeal followed. Complainant asserts that the Agency’s final decision did not
properly set forth that the alleged harasser was initially her former manager (prior to serving as
her Lead and OJI). Complainant reiterates that S1 made derogatory comments regarding her
accent since her first day of employment. Complainant asserts that she provided notice to S2
regarding S1’s behavior and requested a change of supervisor, but that S2 ignored the
harassment and allowed the behavior to continue.

In response, the Agency requests that we affirm its final decision finding no discrimination. The
Agency reiterates that Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to harassment.
Regarding the alleged comments made by S1 to Complainant regarding her accent, the Agency
sets forth that “[a]ssuming the truth of Complainant’s allegations, nothing in S1’s comments
indicate she mocked Complainant’s accent or that the comments were based on her being of
Mexican descent. At best, [S1] indicated she expressed difficulty in communicating with
Complainant. At worst, S1’s comments were the type of insensitive, hurtful comments that the
Commission has declined to find as discriminatory.” Agency Response Brief at 11. The
Agency asserts that Complainant’s claims fall short of the severity and pervasiveness required
for a hostile work environment. Furthermore, the Agency states that management promptly
separated Complainant and S1. Specifically, the Agency states that after Complainant raised the
issue of harassment by S1 in late July 2021, S4 separated Complainant and S1 and that
Complainant set forth that she had no further contact with S1 after this separation. The Agency
further sets forth regarding Complainant raising the matter of alleged harassment by S1 with S2,
it “appears” that Complainant only expressed a “lack of support.” Agency Response Brief at 17-
18.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

To establish a claim of hostile environment harassment, Complainant must show that: (1) she
belongs to a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of
unwelcome verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment
complained of was based on her statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or
condition of employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
work environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
                                               4                                    2022003395

(5) there is a basis for imputing liability to the Agency. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d
897 (11th Cir. 1982); Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). See also,
Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems Inc., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (March 8,
1994).

In other words, to prove her harassment claim, Complainant must establish that she was
subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a “reasonable person” in
Complainant’s position would have found the conduct to be hostile or abusive. Complainant
must also prove that the conduct was taken because of a protected basis – in this case, her
race/national origin. Only if Complainant establishes both of those elements – hostility and
motive – will the question of Agency liability present itself.

With respect to the Agency’s liability, where the harassment by a supervisor does not result in a
tangible employment action, the employer can raise an affirmative defense, which is subject to
proof by a preponderance of the evidence, by demonstrating: (1) that it exercised reasonable care
to prevent and promptly any harassing behavior; and (2) that the employee unreasonably failed
to take advantage of any preventative and corrective opportunities provided by the employer or
to avoid harm otherwise. 2 Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful Harassment
by Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999).

Complainant provides the following dates relevant to the formal complaint. Complainant began
employment with the Agency on June 8, 2020. Complainant’s Brief at 2-3 (of 15). 3 At this time,
the alleged harasser was her first-level supervisor (S1) until February 28, 2021. Id. Complainant
sets forth that her former second-level supervisor (S2) served in this position from August 1,
2020-February 2021. Id. On March 1, 2021, another employee (S3) became her first-level
supervisor and at this time S1 returned to the position of Lead Case Advocate (Lead) until her
retirement on November 18, 2021. Id. On February 28, 2021, S2 left Agency employment and a
new Agency official (S4) served as her second-level supervisor from July 15, 2021-December
31, 2021. Id.

Complainant alleged that she was subjected to harassment by S1. She alleged that S1 made
derogatory comments regarding her accent. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 53. Specifically,
Complainant stated that the comments started during a phone conversation with S1 during her
first day of employment. S1 stated that she disliked Complainant’s Spanish accent and did not
want to talk with her but that she was required to “deal with [her]]”.



2
 An employer will be liable for harassment by non-supervisory employees if it knew or should
have known about the harassment and failed to take prompt and appropriate corrective action.
3
  Complainant’s appeal brief does not contain page numbers. Our citations to Complainant’s
brief, therefore, refer to the page numbers of the PDF document. Complainant submitted two
statements on appeal: a 15-page document and a 7-page document.
                                                5                                     2022003395

ROI at 53-54. Complainant sets forth that these comments “occurred very frequently, although
not numbered, it was [constant] verbal attacks, on [a] daily and weekly basis.” Complainant’s
Brief at 9 (of 15). In addition, she alleged that S1 took other actions against her, such as moving
up dates on assigned actions in an effort to make it appear that the actions were late.
Complainant asserts that in 2020, she informed S2 of the alleged harassment by email and in a
phone conversation and requested a new manager but that S2 failed to act and the harassment
continued. ROI at 58, Complainant’s Brief 4-5 (of 15). Complainant alleged that the harassment
continued when S1 was no longer her supervisor but served as her Lead and her OJI.

As an initial matter, the Agency’s acceptance letter and final decision framed the instant claim as
involving harassment by one of Complainant’s co-workers. ROI at 28, FAD at 1. However, as
referenced above, S1 initially was Complainant’s first-level supervisor from June 8, 2020-
February 28, 2021. Thus, the harassment analysis regarding whether there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer will differ for the time period S1 served as Complainant’s supervisor
compared to the period when S1 was no longer Complainant’s supervisor.

The record reflects that S1 retired from the Agency in November 2021 and that S2 left Agency
employment in February 2021. ROI at 52. The EEO Investigator sought affidavits from S1 and
S2. However, S1 and S2 failed to respond. ROI at 37. To the extent the Agency sets forth that
Complainant’s claim that S1 made derogatory comments regarding her accent is not
corroborated, the record reflects that Complainant was teleworking during the time S1 served as
her supervisor and she stated that these comments occurred over the phone. ROI at 54.
Furthermore, as set forth above, S1 did not respond to the affidavit request. Therefore,
Complainant’s claim regarding these comments is uncontested.

To the extent the Agency asserts that assuming arguendo that S1 made the alleged comments
regarding Complainant’s accent, the alleged comments were not based on her national origin and
only indicated that S1 had difficulty in communicating with Complainant, we disagree. “An
accent can reflect whether a person lived in a different country or grew up speaking a language
other than English. National origin and accent are therefore intertwined and…harassment based
on accent may violate Title VII.” EEOC Enforcement Guidance on National Origin
Discrimination, EEOC Notice No. 915.005 (V)(A) (Nov. 18, 2016). Comments about an
employee’s accent may, under certain circumstances, raise an inference of national origin
discrimination. Merely asking a complainant to speak more slowly or repeat himself to aid in
understanding, does not, without more, reflect an animus based on national origin. Tran v. Dep’t
of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120102086 (March 28, 213) (“merely expressing an inability
to understand a person’s ‘manner of speaking’ does not necessarily reflect animus based upon
national origin”), req. to recons. den., EEOC Request No. 0520130391 (Sept. 26, 2013); Genny
L. v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120172722 (Oct. 24, 2018).
                                                 6                                      2022003395

In the instant matter, while one of S1’s alleged comments was “I do not understand you,” 4 S1’s
alleged comments went further than expressing that she had difficulty understanding
Complainant including, “I do not like that you have an accent”, “I do not like to communicate
with Spanish speakers”, “I prefer not to talk to you, but I have to talk to you regardless, I have to
deal with you because I am your manager.” ROI at 56. Complainant alleged, as set forth above,
that these comments occurred “very frequently.”

During the investigative phase of the federal administrative process, the agency has an obligation
to develop an adequate investigative record. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108. An appropriate factual
record is one that allows a reasonable factfinder to draw a conclusion as to whether
discrimination occurred. 29. C.F.R. § 1614.108(b). The investigator must conduct a thorough
investigation, identifying and obtaining all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how
it may affect the outcome. EEO Management Directive 110, Ch. 6 § V.D. Therefore, the
investigator must exhaust those sources of information likely to support the positions of the
complainant and the agency.

We are unable to ascertain based on the record before us whether the Agency subjected
Complainant to discrimination as alleged and thus remand this matter for a supplemental
investigation. In its response brief, the Agency asserts that it took prompt corrective action by
separating S1 and Complainant after Complainant raised the issue of harassment in July 2021.
Agency Brief at 17. However, Complainant asserts that she previously informed S2 of the
alleged harassment in 2020 by email and in a phone conversation and requested a new manager,
but that S2 failed to act. It is unclear based on the record before us if Complainant specifically
told S2 that S1 was harassing her based on a protected EEO class (i.e. national origin which
would include accent). The record contains an email from S2 to Complainant dated October 30,
2020 with the subject “RE: Leave for 11/2 and Other Matters”. 5 Therein, S2 referenced
Complainant providing examples of receiving a “lack of support.” ROI at 113. S2 set forth,
“I’m confident through ongoing communication we can address these and all matters in the most
productive manner.” Id. The record, however, does not contain Complainant’s initial email to
S2 on this topic and the full email trail. While Complainant also alleged that she had a phone
conversation with S2 in which she complained of the alleged harassment, we are unable to
ascertain from the record before us if she informed S2 during the phone conversation that S1 was
harassing her based on a protected EEO class. Based on the foregoing, we are unable to
determine whether Complainant specifically alleged to S2 that S1 was subjecting her to
harassment based on a protected EEO class.

The record also indicates that two harassment complaints/investigations were opened through the
Agency’s internal Anti-Harassment Program based on Complainant’s allegations.



4
  Complainant asserts that prior to S1’s comments other managers and peers never mentioned a
problem with her accent. ROI at 57.
5
  S1 was copied on this email.
                                               7                                    2022003395

However, the record does not appear to contain the full documents for either of these complaints
prior to their closure. 6 ROI 99-101, 107, 110, 191, 199.

Some of the alleged incidents also warrant further development. For example, regarding incident
(2), Complainant alleges that S1 moved up assigned actions to create a long list of past due
actions. ROI at 63. We acknowledge that the record contains various printouts entitled “Next
Action Summary Report by Group”. ROI at 88-98. However, we are unable to ascertain from
these printouts if S1 made the alleged changes for the various actions at issue, and what the
previously assigned dates were for the actions at issue. Regarding this incident, S3 stated that
Complainant had a lot of cases “off calendar” and therefore S1 added them. ROI at 187.
However, Complainant asserted, in her rebuttal affidavit, that the actions at issue were not “off
calendar” but rather S1 had moved the dates up to create an unmanageable inventory. ROI at
108.

S4, in his affidavit, asserts that in one case in which Complainant alleged that S1 rescheduled
case actions to make them appear late, he informed Complainant that S1 had not scheduled any
actions in the matter but that it was Complainant. ROI at 197. In her rebuttal affidavit,
Complainant’s asserts that S4’s assertion is incorrect. Rather, Complainant states that “TAMIS
software shows during the first access to a case…, the name of the real creator (S1) but after
refreshing the software access, the actions move to, as creator, the name of the person viewing
the record, [Complainant]. Thus, when discussed on live video with S4 that ‘changing’ situation
occurs.”

Based on the foregoing, we find that this matter warrants further development and we remand
this matter for a supplemental investigation.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we VACATE the
Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination and we REMAND this matter in its entirety
for a supplemental investigation in accordance with the ORDER below. 7

                                            ORDER

Within ninety (90) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall take the
following actions:



6
 Complainant states that the first investigation she requested be closed when she received a new
supervisor in March 2021. ROI 107. Regarding the second investigation, Complainant states that
she requested that the investigation be closed after she and S1 were separated. ROI at 108.
7
  While we do no address herein all the incidents comprising Complainant’s hostile work
environment, we remand the entire complaint so as not to fragment Complainant’s claim.
                                                8                                     2022003395

       1. The Agency shall conduct a supplemental investigation consistent with this decision
          regarding Complainant’s hostile work environment claim. The record should be
          supplemented with any documentation regarding the two complaints opened under
          the Agency’s internal Anti-Harassment Program as referenced herein. The
          Investigator shall supplement the record with any emails Complainant sent to S2 in
          which she alleged harassment by S1 (including the full email trail which
          encompassed the email S2 sent to Complainant dated October 30, 2020 with the
          subject “RE: Leave for 11/2 and Other Matters” as referenced herein). The
          supplemental investigation shall include a supplemental affidavit from Complainant
          addressing whether (and if so, on what date) she informed S2 (either by email and/or
          phone conversation) that the alleged harassment by S1 was based on a protected EEO
          class (i.e. national origin including accent). Complainant’s affidavit shall also clearly
          address, in layperson terms for someone not familiar with the Agency’s software, the
          specific actions S1 allegedly moved up in order to make it appear as if Complainant’s
          actions were late. Complainant shall provide full documentation reflecting how each
          action at issue, in the Agency’s software, was created by S1 and documentation
          reflecting her claim that S1 moved up dates. If Complainant is unable to gain access
          to any of these printouts/documents, the Investigator shall ensure that these
          documents are provided by an Agency official with access to such documents.

            The investigation shall also include supplemental affidavits by S3 and S4 addressing
            Complainant’s claims regarding S1 allegedly moving up the dates of assigned actions
            to make Complainant’s actions appear late. S3’s supplemental affidavit shall also
            address Complainant’s assertion, in her rebuttal affidavit referenced herein, that the
            actions Complainant is raising issues with were not “off calendar” (but were already
            on her calendar). S4’s supplemental affidavit shall address Complainant’s assertion,
            raised on appeal and referenced herein, that the case in which S4 stated Complainant
            herself created the actions at issue was actually due to the database reflecting who
            was viewing the document rather than who originally created the action. Finally, the
            Agency shall supplement the record with any additional evidence relevant to this
            matter and consistent with this decision.

       2.   Thereafter, the Agency shall issue a new final decision, with appeal rights to the
            Commission.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital formal as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §1614.403(g). Further,
the report must include evidence that the directed action has been taken.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory.
                                                9                                     2022003395

Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency
shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital
format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under which
compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via
FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when
previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant
and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                                10                                     2022003395

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 11                                     2022003395

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                          Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 14, 2024
Date
