          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                        Office of Federal Operations
                               P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                               Micheline L., 1
                               Complainant,

                                     v.

                                Louis DeJoy,
                            Postmaster General,
                        United States Postal Service
                         (Field Areas and Regions),
                                   Agency.

                          Appeal No. 2022003909

                      Hearing No. 450-2022-00017X

                       Agency No. 4G-752-0072-21

                                DECISION

On July 1, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a), from the Agency’s June 14, 2022, final decision concerning her
equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision.

                            ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the AJ appropriately dismissed Complainant’s hearing request and
whether the Agency’s investigation was adequate for a factfinder to draw
conclusions as to whether Complainant established that she was subjected to
discrimination based on her disability.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                           2022003909

                                BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Carrier Technician at the Agency’s Garland-South Station in Garland, Texas.

On April 17, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against her on the basis of disability (physical- neck and
shoulder) when:

      1.    Beginning on or about November 7, 2020 and ongoing, she was
            continually harassed (questioned) about her work restrictions and
            not provided work assistance;
      2.    Beginning on or about November 9, 2020, and continuing, she
            was required to do the walking portion of her route;
      3.    On December 23, 2020, she was yelled at and embarrassed in
            front of her coworkers;
      4.    On December 23, 2020, she was required to submit a new CA-17
            and not paid for the time she missed from work to get the CA-17
            completed;
      5.    On December 23, 2020, she was moved off Route 74 and required
            to case and carry Route 23;
      6.    On February 1, 2021, she was called to the supervisor’s desk to
            discuss her medical documents;
      7.    On March 23, 2021, she was harassed and referred to the District
            Reasonable Accommodation Committee (DRAC);
      8.    On April 2, 2021, her request for leave was not granted and she
            was charged Absent Without Leave (AWOL); and
      9.    On or about April 15, 2021, management gave her a modified
            assignment which changed her start time to 10:00 am and did not
            provide her with a mail cart. 2


2
 The Agency dismissed a claim alleging that Complainant was attacked by a
dog while on the job and not properly compensated for the time missed
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §1614.107(a)(1) as a collateral attack on the Office of
Workers’ Compensation (OWCP), which has jurisdiction over issues of
compensation for work-related injuries. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at
71-75. We affirm the dismissal as the Commission has repeatedly stated that
a complainant cannot use the EEO process to challenge actions which occurred
during the OWCP adjudicatory process. See Janiece H. v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120160070 (Jan. 8, 2016).
                                        3                           2022003909

The gravamen of Complainant’s claims amount to an allegation of a violation
of the Rehabilitation Act because the Manager of Customer Service (Manager)
subjected her to harassment based on her disability and forced her to work
outside of her medical restrictions. Specifically, Complainant argues that the
Manager marked her AWOL even though she had submitted a leave request
which had been previously approved by the Supervisor of Customer Service
(Supervisor), and that the Agency denied her a mail cart to help her with her
duties.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge
(AJ). Complainant requested a hearing, but the AJ denied the hearing request
as a sanction for Complainant’s failure to submit the required Preliminary Case
Information and her failure to respond to the AJ’s Order to Show Cause. The
AJ remanded the complaint to the Agency, and the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination
as alleged.

                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant did not file a brief on appeal.

The Agency argued that the AJ properly dismissed the hearing request and
that its final decision accurately applied the facts and concluded that
Complainant did not establish that she was subjected to discrimination.

                            STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).            See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).
                                       4                           2022003909

                                   ANALYSIS

Dismissal of Hearing Request

The Commission's regulations confer upon its AJs very broad responsibility for
adjudicating an EEO complaint once a complainant's hearing request has been
granted, and that responsibility gives the AJs wide latitude in directing the
terms, conduct, or course of EEO administrative hearings. Chere S. v. Gen.
Serv. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0720180012 (Nov. 30, 2018). The AJ's
discretionary authority includes the power to impose sanctions upon a party
that fails to comply with his orders. Id. When the a party fails without good
cause shown to respond fully and in timely fashion to an order of an
administrative judge, or requests for the investigative file, for documents,
records, comparative data, statistics, affidavits, or the attendance of
witness(es), the administrative judge shall, in appropriate circumstances: (i)
Draw an adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony
of the requested witness, would have reflected unfavorably on the party
refusing to provide the requested information; (ii) Consider the matters to
which the requested information or testimony pertains to be established in
favor of the opposing party; (iii) Exclude other evidence offered by the party
failing to produce the requested information or witness; (iv) Issue a decision
fully or partially in favor of the opposing party; or (v) Take such other actions
as appropriate. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(f)(3).

In this case, the AJ dismissed the hearing request after Complainant failed to
respond to the AJ’s Order to submit Preliminary Case Information and then
failed to respond to the AJ’s order to show cause. In both these orders, the
AJ warned Complainant that failure to comply could result in sanctions,
including the dismissal of her hearing request. The AJ noted that all the orders
were sent to Complainant via the EEOC Public Portal at the email address she
identified on her hearing request and none of the orders were marked
undeliverable. Complainant only submitted an untimely Preliminary Case
Information well over a month after the AJ had required Complainant to
submit the Preliminary Case Information but in doing so, failed to provide any
justification or explanation for the untimely submission or her earlier failure
to respond to the order to show cause. The AJ therefore found that dismissal
of Complainant’s hearing request was appropriate due to her repeated failure
to respond to the AJ’s orders with no cause given.
                                      5                           2022003909

We find that the AJ acted within her discretion by dismissing the hearing
request. We emphasize that at no point has Complainant provided any reason
to explain her failure to submit her Preliminary Case Information in a timely
manner or her failure to respond to the AJ’s order to show cause. The
Commission has consistently held that a complainant must act with due
diligence in pursuit of her claim. See Alice S. v. Social Sec’y Admin., EEOC
Appeal No. 2019002475 (Sept. 22, 2020). We find that Complainant’s actions
demonstrate a disregard of the administrative process and therefore, the AJ
acted within her discretion in dismissing Complainant’s hearing request. See
Cleo S. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120181406 (Feb. 28, 2020)
(affirming dismissal of hearing request for failure to participate in email
communications being sought by the Agency and to produce documentation
ordered by AJ in a manner demonstrating disregard for administrative process
and unwillingness to comply with AJ's orders despite warning of
consequences).

EEO Investigation

EEOC regulation requires, inter alia, that an agency develop an impartial and
appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised
in the complaint. One purpose of an investigation is to gather facts upon which
a reasonable fact finder may draw conclusions as to whether a violation of the
discrimination statutes has occurred. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b); EEO MD-110,
at Chap. 6, § IV.B. An investigation must include “a thorough review of the
circumstances under which the alleged discrimination occurred; the treatment
of members of the Complainant's group as compared with the treatment of
similarly situated employees...and any policies and/or practices that may
constitute or appear to constitute discrimination, even though they have not
been expressly cited by the complainant.” Id. at § IV.C. In addition, an
investigator must identify and obtain “all relevant evidence from all sources
regardless of how it may affect the outcome.” Id. at § VI.D.

Upon review, however, we find that the EEO investigation was inadequate and
that the record lacks the thoroughness required for the fact finder to address
the ultimate issue of whether Complainant established a violation of the
Rehabilitation Act by forcing her to work outside of her physical restrictions
and because the Manager subjected her to discrimination based on her
disability.

Here, the record did not contain the medical documentation of Complainant’s
physical restrictions, such as what was submitted to the DRAC.
                                       6                          2022003909

The record only contains the modified light duty offers which the Agency made
but did not include any information about the process with which the Agency
arrived at the light duty assignments nor did the investigation include
affidavits from any witnesses who could possibly corroborate Complainant’s
assertion that she was made to perform her duties outside of her restrictions.

In addition, we note that the record indicates there may be some merit to
Complainant’s claims. For example, the record contains the decisions issued
for two of the union grievances which Complainant filed, the first which alleged
that the Manager frequently yelled at Complainant on the workroom floor and
made derogatory remarks to and about employees’ performance and their
medical restrictions. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 19-22. That
grievance was found to have merit, noting that several employees who were
not identified had testified that the Manager frequently yelled at employees
and made derogatory remarks about their performance and medical
restrictions. See id. The record also contains a copy of a decision in another
grievance which Complainant filed alleging that management had violated her
medical restrictions by, among other things, not providing her with a mail cart
as recommended by her doctor. See ROI at 159-162. That grievance decision
found Complainant’s grievance to have merit because Complainant’s physician
had recommended that Complainant be provided with a mail cart to help her
perform her duties but that management had failed to provide her with a mail
cart and falsely claimed that it did not have a mail cart available even though
the decision specifically noted that the station at which Complainant worked
was known to have two unused mail carts that could have been used by
Complainant. 3 See id. The record does not, however, include any of the
supporting evidence which was relied on in determining that the grievances
had merit, which is particular concerning because both of these grievances
specifically involve the underlying merits of Complainant’s EEO claims.

We further note that the record is not clear as to why Complainant was marked
AWOL on April 2, 2021. Complainant asserted that she submitted a leave
request and after she returned from her leave, she was informed that the
Manager had said that Complainant would be marked AWOL because her leave
request had not been filled out correctly. See ROI at 122.

3
 The Manager, in contrast, stated that Complainant was initially denied a mail
cart because her medical documentation did not support the need for one and
then after receiving the documentation, the Manager ordered a mail cart via
eBay. See ROI at 138; 150-51. We note that the Manager’s credibility is
questionable considering the fact that her assertions are contradicted by other
evidence in the record including the grievance decisions.
                                       7                          2022003909

The record, however, contains a copy of the leave request Complainant
submitted, which was approved by the Supervisor, as well as a supporting
note from Complainant’s physician explaining that Complainant had an
appointment on April 2 and was not available to work. See ROI at 25-26;
171. Complainant’s Supervisor confirmed that Complainant submitted a leave
request requesting Leave Without Pay for April 2, 2021. See ROI at 167. The
Manager, however, asserted that Complainant was marked AWOL on that date
because Complainant did not submit a leave request and was a “no call no
show,” which is contradicted by the evidence in the record. See ROI at 149.
The record does not contain any reason for why Complainant’s leave request
which was approved by the Supervisor was apparently later denied, such as
an explanation as to whether or why Complainant’s leave request was
somehow inadequate, nor is there any documentation as to who was
ultimately responsible for making the decision as the Manager denied
responsibility. We note that the Agency’s final decision entirely failed to
address this discrepancy in the record.

Based on the foregoing, we find the investigative record is inadequate and
needs to be supplemented so that a determination on the merits of
Complainant's complaint can be made. See generally, Stewart v. Dep't of
Homeland Sec., EEOC Request No. 0520070124 (Nov. 14, 2011) (inadequate
investigation); O'Neill v. Dep't of State, EEOC Appeal No. 0120083597 (Jan.
15, 2009) (inadequate investigation).

                                CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency's
decision and REMAND the matter for supplemental investigation and further
processing in accordance with the ORDER set forth below.

                 ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD (B0224)

The Agency is ordered to conduct a supplemental investigation to develop an
adequate factual record regarding Complainant's claims within 90 days of
receipt of this order. The Agency shall obtain all pertinent evidence including,
but not limited to, affidavits from Complainant, responsible management
officials and other witnesses regarding:

   1. Additional information from Complainant as to the derogatory remarks
      made by the Manager regarding her and other employees’ performance
                                       8                          2022003909

      and medical restrictions, such as was raised in the grievance decision
      issued on February 10, 2021;
   2. Any and all medical documentation pertaining to Complainant’s modified
      job assignments including any documentation submitted to the District
      Reasonable Accommodation Committee (DRAC);
   3. Any and all evidence obtained during the investigations into
      Complainant’s two grievances which support the grievance decisions
      issued on February 10, 2021 and June 10, 2021, respectively, including
      any and all witness statements and the documents listed as attachments
      in the grievance decisions but which are not included in the record;
   4. Additional information and documentation regarding the denial of
      Complainant’s leave request, including an affidavit from the individual
      identified in Complainant’s affidavit as telling her that the Manager had
      said Complainant would be marked AWOL because her leave request
      was not properly filled out.
The Agency shall also offer Complainant an opportunity to submit a rebuttal
to the additional affidavits obtained during the supplemental investigation.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide Complainant
with a copy of the supplemental record and shall notify Complainant of the
appropriate rights. Following completion of the supplemental investigation,
the Agency shall issue a final decision on the merits of Complainant’s claims
including appeal rights.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the
Agency shall give priority to this remanded case in order to comply with the
time frames contained in this Order. The Office of Federal Operations will issue
sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not making
reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a
complaint.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital
format as provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the
Commission's Decision.” The Agency must send to the Compliance Officer: 1)
a copy of the Agency's letter of acknowledgement to Complainant; 2) a copy
of the Agency's notice that transmits the supplemental investigative file and
notice of rights; 3) and a copy of the Agency’s final decision in this matter
following the supplemental investigation. The report shall be submitted via the
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                      9                           2022003909

       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the
Commission’s corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days
of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital
format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket
number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in
the digital format required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when
previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions
to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant
may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to
enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or following an
administrative petition for enforcement.         See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407,
1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has
the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in accordance with
the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-
16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of
the orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in
the referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
                                       10                          2022003909

      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).
                                       11                          2022003909

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative
processing of your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you
have the right to file such action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred
and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with
the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official
Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not
the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action
will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 23, 2024
Date
