           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Clifford L., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                            Denis R. McDonough,
                                 Secretary,
                       Department of Veterans Affairs
                      (Veterans Health Administration),
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024001561

                     Agency No. 2003-666-2022-148504

                                  DECISION

On December 27, 2023, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s December 4, 2023, final decision
concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the
following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

                             ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether Complainant established that he was denied a reasonable
accommodation for his disabilities and subjected to discrimination based on
his disability and reprisal.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                           2024001561

                                BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Training Instructor at the Agency’s Sheridan VA Medical Center in Sheridan,
Wyoming.

On November 30, 2022, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against him on the bases of disability (learning
disabilities, anxiety, and fibromyalgia) and reprisal for protected EEO activity
under Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 when the Agency
subjected him to numerous incidents of discrimination and harassment
including but not limited to the Chief of Education Services (Chief) insisting on
keeping the door between her office and Complainant’s desk open stating that
it was so “[she] can watch [him]”; the Chief denied his request for a
reasonable accommodation; on February 8, 2022, the Chief issued
Complainant a letter of reprimand; and on July 18, 2022, Complainant was
terminated from his employment and the Acting Chief of Nutrition and Food
Services (Acting Chief) instructed police to escort him out of the building
immediately while he was trying to collect his personal belongings. 2

Complainant started work at the Agency in October 2021 and was subject to
a two-year probationary period. He stated that he suffers from learning
disabilities and is a 70 percent disabled veteran due to his anxiety and
fibromyalgia, which includes severe social anxiety.           See Report of
Investigation (ROI) at 126-27. He asserted that his limitations are “being
exposed to [] Hostile and abusive people at the Sheridan VA.” See ROI at
127. He insisted that he was not allowed to perform the majority of his
accepted job duties. See ROI at 127. He asserted that he told the Chief and
other Agency management officials about his disabilities and the “bullying and
abuse” he suffered but the Agency took no action. See ROI at 129. He stated
that he was a “known whistleblower,” but did not provide details as to what
specific actions he took that constituted whistleblowing. See ROI at 130.


2
 The Agency initially dismissed Complainant’s complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§1614.107(a)(2) for untimely counselor contact. Complainant appealed the
Agency’s dismissal and on appeal, the Commission reversed the procedural
dismissal and remanded the complaint to the Agency for investigation. See
Clifford L. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 2023002090 (June 6,
2023). During the investigation, Complainant amended his complaint to add
more incidents of harassment as well as alleging reprisal for whistleblower
activities.
                                        3                            2024001561

He stated that the Chief refused to submit his request for a reasonable
accommodation several times and when it was finally submitted, the “ADA
office” did not record it initially and it was not actually recorded until December
2021. See ROI at 132. He asserted that the Chief offered alternatives but
“did not address much of [his] requests,” and instead offered him things he
did not ask for and falsely accused him of having focus issues which he denies
having. See ROI at 132-33. He stated that she offered him mentors but
essentially told him not to bother other people when he needed work help.
See ROI at 133.

The Associate Director of Patient Care Services (Associate Director), who was
Complainant’s second-line supervisor, explained that when Complainant
began his employment, he began requesting a compressed schedule and
regular recurring telework but not as a reasonable accommodation. See ROI
at 350. She stated that regular recurring telework agreements were based
on the needs of the service and determined separately from telework as a
reasonable accommodation. See ROI at 350-51. The Chief explained that
Complainant’s initial requests for telework, not submitted through the
reasonable accommodation process, were not filled out correctly and so HR
told her that Complainant’s paperwork would not go through so she had to
send the form back to Complainant with the suggested corrections, but
Complainant continued not to make the suggested corrections. See ROI at
255. The Acting Chief explained that Complainant’s request for permanent
full-time could not be granted because one of Complainant’s duties was to
conduct New Employee Orientation which is in person and therefore, full-time
telework was not possible. See ROI at 292-93. He asserted that the initial
position description was not posted as permitting full-time telework and he
explained that to Complainant but that they allowed ad-hoc telework two days
a week unless Complainant was needed to be on site for things like New
Employee Orientation. See ROI at 292. He stated that the whole education
department only had ad hoc telework as did all the dieticians who he managed
at the time. See ROI at 293.

Complainant’s request for a reasonable accommodation form, dated
December 15, 2021, requested telework on Tuesdays and Thursdays; written
instructions and directives; extra time to process instructions; a
compressed/flexible schedule; a dedicated person (Coworker 1) to help him
feel safe; the ability to take a few walks throughout the day; and to be allowed
to remove himself from “uncomfortable situations that triggered [his] medical
condition.” See ROI at 153-58.
                                       4                          2024001561

The attached medical documentation form indicated that Complainant’s
anxiety gets worse when he is around people and “causes problems focusing
on his work,” and further noted that Complainant felt that working from home
would “help him focus.” See ROI at 153-54. Ultimately, on January 25, 2022,
the Agency granted Complainant an alternative accommodation in the form of
ad hoc telework on Tuesdays and Thursdays “as long as coverage at the office
for essential duties is covered;” a compressed schedule; having various people
as mentors available who agree to the task “allowing for other members of
education to get their own work done;” an additional 15 minutes per day to
walk; noise canceling earphones, air purifier, and an upgrade in a designated
office for a secluded space for when Complainant needs a place to go to
refocus. See ROI at 158-59.

Complainant stated that the Chief, who was his first-level supervisor at the
time, would not let him have the clearance he needed to perform his job, told
him to stop bothering her and ask his coworker (Coworker 1) who was
assigned to be his mentor if he had any questions, and gave him insignificant
assignments such as running errands, shoveling snow, and getting things for
her in the education building, but the rest of the time, he was forced to sit at
his desk all day doing very little. See ROI at 163. He stated that the Chief
made him and Coworker 1 sign in and out on a board even to go to the
restroom and when he mentioned it to the Associate Director, she only
laughed and said that the Chief could use a sign in and sign out board, even
if it was only to track the two disabled employees. See ROI at 163. He
asserted that the Associate Director responded to his complaining about how
the Chief was not letting him perform his duties by ignoring him and silencing
him, telling him he needed to stop asking for protection by email even though
email is the primary method of communication. See ROI at 164. He stated
that the Chief yelled and screamed at him and told him that he was not allowed
to leave his chair except on breaks and to go to the restroom and whenever
he did, he needed to sign out on the board on her office door anytime he left
his chair. See ROI at 165. He asserted that no one else but him and Coworker
1 was required to use the sign in board, and it was only after the sign in board
was mentioned at a meeting with all the Education employees where none of
the other employees knew anything about the board that it was agreed they
no longer needed to use it. See ROI at 165-66.

The Chief stated that Complainant was assigned projects based on his
performance expectations, as were other employees in the Education
department. See ROI at 253.
                                      5                           2024001561

She explained that Coworker 1 was assigned to be Complainant’s mentor
when he started working at the Agency and he would give Complainant
assignments but that when a new employee starts at the Agency, there is a
lot of information for a new employee to understand and Coworker 1 would
give him access to much of the necessary information. See ROI at 260. She
stated that she met with Coworker 1 to discuss Complainant’s orientation
process and was told by Coworker 1 that Complainant was progressing in his
knowledge about the Agency. See ROI at 260. She stated that the sign in
process was instituted by the previous supervisor and Complainant started
yelling because he disagreed with the sign in requirement. See ROI at 262.
She asserted that the sign in requirement was discussed the next day at the
morning staff meeting and the staff decided on a different way to keep track
of one another and just tell someone that they were leaving. See ROI at 262.
The Associate Director explained that the Chief established a sign in, sign out
board to help her team know where the rest of the team might be located
because the Sheridan facility has a large campus with multiple buildings and
some distance between the buildings and it was within the Chief’s authority
as a supervisor to track the work of her employees. See ROI at 360. She
stated that to her recollection, Complainant let her know that he did not agree
with the need for the sign in board and felt he did not have to follow his
supervisor’s instructions. See ROI at 360. Coworker 1 stated that the Chief
enacted a sign in sign out board for everyone in the service and when
Complainant questioned her about it, stating that it was treating them like
children, the Chief was “a little indignant,” and denied that the sign in board
was disrespectful. See ROI at 431. He acknowledged that at one point, he
was in a meeting where the Chief would not listen to what he had to say and
in his opinion talked to Complainant as if he were a child. See ROI at 431;
434.

Complainant further stated that after the Chief left and the Acting Chief took
over, the Acting Chief assigned him a full-time position as a Health
Professional Trainee (HPT) on top of his regular position and refused to have
the additional position added to his performance description so he would not
get the credit for doing the extra duties. See ROI at 177-79. He asserted
that when he asked the Acting Chief to just let him do his actual job because
he had no experience to be a Health Professional Trainee, the Acting Chief
only laughed and said he had to do it. See ROI at 179. He stated that the
Acting Chief sent him an email accusing him of causing delays with the Health
Professional Trainees and he informed him that the HPTs turning in their
information caused the delays and the Acting Chief wanted to investigate him
to see if he was doing the job correctly. See ROI at 181.
                                      6                           2024001561

The Chief stated that Health Professionals Trainee duties were on
Complainant’s performance assignments, and he was given training by the
current person in that position and given a team member to help him if
needed. See ROI at 272. The Acting Chief clarified that providing Health
Professionals Trainee training was one of Complainant’s ancillary duties and
Complainant was in charge of supervising 11 HPTs but that in fact,
Complainant only completed the tasks for 6-7 of them and he and another
employee had to complete the rest because Complainant was not following
policy and wasn’t doing the work. See ROI at 314. The Acting Chief stated
that he had received complaints about Complainant’s work, with people saying
that they were concerned about the Health Professionals Trainees not starting
on time and that it was due to Complainant. See ROI at 290. He asserted
that he asked Complainant about it and Complainant claimed it was the HPTs
who were at fault so he asked Complainant to verify his work and in response,
Complainant started alleging harassment. See ROI at 290. The record
includes the contemporaneous email exchange between the Acting Chief and
Complainant where the Acting Chief asked Complainant to send him any
emails Complainant had sent to HPT trainees and when Complainant
questioned the reason for the request, the Acting Chief explained that in the
last three months, there had been a delay with 5 out of the 10 HPTs and
Complainant had told him the issue was with the trainees so he was trying to
verify Complainant’s information. See ROI at 305-308. The Acting Chief then
sent Complainant another email in response to a telephone conversation
reminding Complainant that he was making a reasonable request as
Complainant’s supervisor to verify work is being completed. See ROI at 305.
The record indicates that Complainant’s response was to ask if he would be
subjected to “retaliation and punishment” if he refused. See ROI at 304. The
Associate Director explained that at the time, the Education Department had
some vacancies, including the Health Professionals Trainee position, and so in
order not to have degradation of their services, staff were asked to cover some
tasks while the vacant positions were still being recruited. See ROI at 366-
67.

Complainant stated that on February 8, 2022, the Chief issued him a letter of
reprimand that was “full of lies and dishonest claims,” and he was forced to
sign in and told that if he did not, there would be further punishment. See
ROI at 182. The Chief asserted that Complainant was mistaken about the
dates, and she issued him a counseling memorandum regarding
Complainant’s behavior in the office on December 7, 2021. See ROI at 274.
                                      7                           2024001561

The record indicates that the Chief issued Complainant a memorandum
entitled “Probationary Warning-Revised”(letter of warning) dated February 8,
2022, in which the Chief reminded Complainant that when hired, he was
subject to a two-year probationary/trial period and warning him that his
conduct had been unacceptable, citing inappropriate communications with
management and failure to follow instructions and directing Complainant to
stop sending argumentative emails to all of his supervisors. See Supplemental
ROI at 77-80. Specifically, the letter of warning letter indicated that
Complainant had been instructed to hand in ad hoc telework forms, take and
teach a “crucial conversations” training course, and utilize a sign in sheet to
record his lunch and breaks, and had refused to comply with any of these
instructions in a timely manner. Id. The record includes a memorandum
written by one of Complainant’s coworkers, a Clinical Nurse Educator,
regarding a meeting that occurred on December 7, 2021, at which she stated
that the Chief repeatedly interrupted Complainant, speaking over him and not
letting him say a full sentence without interruption, stating that the Chief’s
tone was rude and inappropriate for a leader. See Supplemental ROI at 81.

Complainant stated that the Acting Chief, the Associate Director, and his then-
Supervisor, the new Chief of Education (Supervisor) used his disability against
him to cause his anxiety to skyrocket. See ROI at 138. He asserted that they
used a police officer who held him hostage in an office with two supervisors
and did not allow him to leave, blocking the door with both hands, which he
stated was a deliberate attempt to cause trauma and fear. See ROI at 138.
He stated that he is not sure whether the Acting Chief, the Associate Director,
or the Supervisor made the decision to terminate him but they were all there
at the termination meeting and tried to intimidate and silence him because he
was speaking out against the “abuse they were using on humans and disabled
humans.”     See ROI at 139-40. He stated that management told him his
termination was due to failure to follow instructions and inappropriate
communications with others but that the Acting Chief refused to provide
evidence to support the allegations. See ROI at 140.

The Acting Chief stated that he made the decision to terminate Complainant
due to Complainant’s inappropriate communications with coworkers and his
failure to follow instructions. See ROI at 297. He explained that Complainant
was rude to a colleague and his work on Health Professional Trainees was
unsatisfactory. See ROI at 298. The Acting Chief explained that when he
gave Complainant the letter of termination, Complainant asked for the
evidence file and he told Complainant that he could reach out to HR for it, at
which point Complainant became angry and started yelling and threatening
the Acting Chief’s job. See ROI at 295.
                                        8                           2024001561

He asserted that was when the Agency police started to try to de-escalate the
situation. See ROI at 295. He denied that Agency police did anything to
intimidate Complainant, explaining that in fact Complainant was given
approximately 45 minutes from 3:45 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. to gather his
belongings and Complainant had already done so and was only using his
computer for the last 30 minutes and that was when police told Complainant
to leave the premises.          See ROI at 296.       The record includes a
contemporaneous memorandum the Acting Chief made of the meeting
regarding Complainant’s termination which stated that after the Acting Chief
started reading the letter of termination to Complainant, Complainant became
upset and insisted the termination was retaliation and unfounded and then
Complainant stood up, grabbed the letter and stormed out of the office
threatening the Acting Chief’s job and yelling that he was going to sue the
Agency. See ROI at 302. The memorandum stated that Complainant was
yelling out in the hallway and when the Acting Chief went out to tell
Complainant that they still needed his badge and his laptop, Complainant
confronted the Acting Chief, pointing his finger at his face, and at that point,
Agency police stepped in and told Complainant to step back twice until
Complainant eventually obeyed. See ROI at 302. The memorandum stated
that Complainant went to his computer and initially responded that he didn’t
need to leave until finally at 4:30, Agency police told Complainant he had to
leave the premises and after Complainant argued a little longer, Complainant
left the building with his belongings. See ROI at 303. The Supervisor stated
that she was a witness at the meeting where the Acting Chief issued
Complainant his letter of termination and she confirmed the Acting Chief’s
description of events, stating that after Complainant was issued the letter, he
went to his computer and started sending emails to his personal email
account, refusing to leave the premises as instructed until Agency police asked
him more than once to do so. See ROI at 384. The record includes a
contemporaneous memorandum the Supervisor wrote describing the meeting
regarding Complainant’s termination which confirms the Acting Chief’s
description of events. See ROI at 391-92.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge
(AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision initially dismissed
Complainant’s claim of reprisal based on his whistleblower status, noting that
whistleblower retaliation does not fall within any of the EEO statutes.
                                       9                          2024001561

The decision went on to find that Complainant did not establish that the
Agency denied him an effective accommodation and that the Agency
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions and
Complainant offered no evidence beyond his subjective assertions to indicate
that the Agency’s reasons were a pretext for discrimination. Finally, the
decision found that the alleged incidents of harassment were not sufficiently
severe or pervasive to constitute an unlawful hostile work environment. The
decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
him to discrimination as alleged.

Complainant appealed.

                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant argues that the Agency’s investigation and its
decision were incomplete because it did not interview all of Complainant’s
suggested witnesses, including Complainant’s wife who is also employed by
the Agency, and that the Agency’s decision did not accurately recount all the
evidence in the record. Complainant further casts doubt on the veracity of
the Agency’s witnesses. Complainant contends that the Agency denied him a
reasonable accommodation and improperly diagnosed with “focus” issues
which he did not have and that the record clearly establishes that Complainant
was subjected to abuse and bullying based on his disability and reprisal for his
protected activity in requesting a reasonable accommodation.

In response, the Agency argues that its final decision accurately recounted all
the facts in the record and the evidence does not support Complainant’s
assertions that he was denied an effective accommodation or that he was
subjected to discrimination or harassment.

                           STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).            See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
                                       10                          2024001561

based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                   ANALYSIS

Adequacy of the Investigation

Investigations of discrimination complaints are governed by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108 and the instructions contained in the Commission’s EEO MD-110.
See EEO MD-110, Chap. 6 (“Development of Impartial and Appropriate Factual
Records”). An adequate agency investigation is one that is developed
impartially and contains an appropriate factual record. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108(b). “An appropriate factual record is one that allows a reasonable
fact finder to draw conclusions as to whether discrimination occurred.” 29
C.F.R. § 1614.108(b); EEO MD-110, Chap. 6, § § I, IV.B., IV.C. An investigator
must be unbiased, objective and thorough. Id. at § V.C. The investigator must
obtain all relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect
the outcome. Id. at § V.D. Moreover, the complainant, upon receipt of the
ROI, is provided an opportunity to cure defects in the record by either notifying
the agency (in writing) of any perceived deficiencies in the investigation or
requesting a hearing before an AJ. See EEO MD-110, at Ch. 6, § XI and Ch.
7, § I.

Here, Complainant insists that the investigation was inadequate because it did
not interview all of his suggested witnesses. We reject Complainant’s
contention. The Commission has stated repeatedly that an EEO Investigator
is not necessarily obligated to pursue all of a complainant’s suggestions
regarding how the investigation is conducted. See Sid E. v. Dep’t of Transp.,
EEOC Appeal No. 2019002597 (Sept. 22, 2020). Moreover, if Complainant
wanted an opportunity to further develop the record through discovery and
cross examination of witnesses, he could have requested a hearing but failed
to do so. 3 See Tommy O. v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.

3
  To the extent Complainant appears to argue that his failure to request a
hearing should be excused because Complainant was not represented by
counsel at the time, we reject the argument. Being represented by counsel is
not a prerequisite to requesting a hearing before an AJ and there is no
indication that Complainant was somehow unable to understand the choice he
made in requesting a final Agency decision instead. The mere fact that
Complainant now regrets his choice because he disagrees with the Agency’s
final decision is unfortunate but does not invalidate Complainant’s failure to
request a hearing.
                                       11                          2024001561

0120152090 (Jun. 8, 2017). Upon our review of the record, we find that the
record was adequately developed.

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 791 (2012) (as
amended) requires that an Agency make reasonable accommodation to the
known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified applicant or
employee with a disability, unless the Agency can demonstrate that doing so
would impose an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9(a) (2017); EEOC
Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship
under the Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance) (revised
Oct. 17, 2002). Once an employer becomes aware of the need for an
accommodation of an employee’s disability, the employer may engage in an
interactive process with the employee to identify and implement appropriate
reasonable accommodations. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3) (2019). An Agency
may choose among reasonable accommodations as long as the chosen
accommodation is effective, and while the preference of the individual with a
disability should be given primary consideration, an Agency has the ultimate
discretion to choose between effective accommodations. See Enforcement
Guidance, supra, at Q. 9.

To establish that he was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant
must show that: (1) he is an individual with a disability, as defined by 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) he is a “qualified” individual with a disability pursuant
to 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed to provide him with a
reasonable accommodation. See, e.g., Bill A. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120131989 (Oct. 26, 2016).

In this case, Complainant insists that the Agency denied him a reasonable
accommodation because the Agency did not grant him all that he requested,
for example having Coworker 1 as a dedicated “safe person” to assist him,
and offering him accommodations he had not requested by improperly
diagnosing focus issues which he did not have. 4 Complainant’s arguments are
without merit. To the extent Complainant argues that the Agency improperly
diagnosed him, Complainant’s contentions are not supported by the evidence.


4
 To the extent Complainant insists that the Chief either destroyed his initial
reasonable accommodation request or somehow delayed in submitting it to
the RA Coordinator, there is no evidence in the record supporting his
assertions.
                                       12                          2024001561

Complainant’s own medical documentation attached to his reasonable
accommodation request specifically noted that Complainant’s anxiety “causes
problems focusing on his work,” and that Complainant felt that working from
home would “help him focus.” See ROI at 153-54. The Agency therefore
acted reasonably in offering Complainant’s additional accommodations such
as noise-canceling headphones and a secluded office to help him focus
because his own documentation stated that Complainant’s medical condition
led to his having problems with focusing. While Complainant clearly takes
issue with the Agency not specifically designating Coworker 1 to be his “safe
person” to assist him but offering instead various other employees in the
Education department to assist him provided they could do so while also
performing their own duties, Complainant does not explain why using those
other employees would not have been effective. In this case, the gravamen
of Complainant’s argument is that the Agency denied him a reasonable
accommodation because the Agency did not offer him all that he asked for.
However, while Complainant is entitled to an effective accommodation, he is
not entitled to the accommodation of his choice. See Brenton W. v. Dep’t of
the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 2022003193 (Dec. 5, 2022). Complainant has
not established that the alternative accommodations the Agency offered were
not effective. We therefore find that Complainant has not established that the
Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act by denying him a reasonable
accommodation.

Disparate Treatment

Applying the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting standard defined in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), a complainant
initially must establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts
which, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination,
i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment
action. See St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 507 (1993);
Texas Dep’t of Community Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (1981);
McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Burdine, 450
U.S. at 253. Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant has the
responsibility to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency’s action was based on prohibited considerations of discrimination, that
is, its articulated reason for its action was not its true reason but a sham or
pretext for discrimination. See Hicks, 509 U.S. at 511; Burdine, 450 U.S. at
252-5 3; McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804.
                                       13                          2024001561

Complainant may establish a prima facie case of discrimination by providing
evidence that: (1) he is a member of a protected class; (2) he suffered an
adverse employment action; and (3) either that similarly situated individuals
outside his protected class were treated differently, or other circumstances
surrounding the adverse employment action give rise to an inference of
discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13; Reeves v.
Sanderson Plumbing, 530 U.S. 133, 142 (2000); Bodett v. CoxCom, Inc., 366
F.3d 736, 743-44 (9th Cir.2004) (internal quotation marks omitted).

Complainant may establish a prima facie case of reprisal by showing that: (1)
he engaged in a protected activity; (2) the agency was aware of the protected
activity; (3) subsequently, he was subjected to adverse treatment by the
agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected activity and the adverse
treatment. Whitmire v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340
(Sept. 25, 2000). When establishing a prima facie case of retaliation under
Title VII, close temporal proximity is sufficient to infer a causal nexus between
an employee’s protected activity and an adverse action on the part of an
employer. See Clark County School Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273
(2001) (noting that “cases that accept mere temporal proximity between an
employer’s knowledge of protected activity and an adverse employment action
as sufficient evidence of causality to establish a prima facie case uniformly
hold that the temporal proximity must be ‘very close”’).

We find that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case based on his
disability. While it is undisputed that the various management officials were
all made aware that Complainant had a disability, Complainant did not identify
any similarly-situated individuals who did not have a disability who were
treated differently nor is there any evidence beyond Complainant’s own
subjective beliefs that any of the Agency’s actions were based on his disability.
Complainant’s subjective beliefs are not enough to establish a prima facie
case.

We do find that Complainant has established a prima facie case of reprisal for
any incidents occurring after December 15, 2021, based on his protected
activity of requesting a reasonable accommodation and then in contacting an
EEO counselor on February 2, 2022. 5 We find, however, that the Agency
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for all of its actions.

5
  We affirm the Agency’s dismissal of Complainant’s claim of whistleblower
retaliation. See Jill M. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 2021000550
(July 15, 2021) (reprisal based on whistleblowing activity not within the
jurisdiction of the Commission).
                                       14                          2024001561

The Chief issued Complainant a memorandum entitled “Probationary Warning-
Revised” warning Complainant that his conduct had been unacceptable due to
his inappropriate communications with management and failure to follow
instructions. See Supplemental ROI at 77-80. Specifically, the letter of
warning indicated that Complainant had been instructed to hand in ad hoc
telework forms, take and teach a “crucial conversations” training course, and
utilize a sign in sheet to record his lunch and breaks, and had refused to
comply with any of these instructions in a timely manner. Id. Similarly, the
Acting Chief stated that he decided to terminate Complainant based on the
inappropriate manner in which Complainant communicated with his coworkers
and his failure to follow supervisor instructions. See ROI at 297. This is
further supported by the contemporaneous evidence in the record of
Complainant’s emails to his supervisors which indicated that Complainant sent
frequent emails to various management officials accusing them of retaliation
and abuse with little to no substantiated evidence and questioning their right
to take some actions.

We further conclude that Complainant did not establish that any of the
Agency’s reasons are a pretext for discrimination.           While Complainant
repeatedly casts doubt on the veracity of all the other witnesses’ testimony,
we note that because Complainant did not request a hearing, we do not have
the benefit of an AJ’s credibility determinations and can only evaluate the facts
based on the weight of the evidence presented. See Lore v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113283 (Sept. 13, 2013) (complainant failed to
establish that witnesses made false statements where he withdrew his request
for a hearing and credibility determinations were unable to be made). In this
case, Complainant submitted no evidence of pretext aside from his repeated
insistence that the management officials were motivated by discriminatory or
retaliatory animus. However, his clear disagreement with the Agency’s
actions unsupported by any probative evidence is not sufficient to establish
pretext.    See Complainant v. Envtl. Prot. Agency, EEOC Appeal No.
0520140302 (Oct. 23, 2014). The Commission has repeatedly stated that
mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is a pretext for
intentional discrimination are insufficient because subjective belief, however
genuine, does not constitute evidence of any unlawful motive. See Leif S. v.
Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 2021004037 (April 28, 2022); Juliet
B. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019). We find
no persuasive evidence that Complainant’s protected classes were a factor in
any of the Agency’s actions.
                                       15                           2024001561

At all times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by
a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s reasons were not the real
reasons and that discriminatory animus was a factor in its actions. Here,
Complainant failed to carry this burden. See Liz M. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120150805 (April 5, 2017).

Hostile Work Environment

Discriminatory harassment is actionable if it is sufficiently severe or pervasive
that it results in an alteration of the conditions of the Complainant’s
employment. See Enforcement Guidance on Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc.,
EEOC Notice No. 915.002, at 3 (Mar. 8, 1994). To prove a claim of
discriminatory harassment, a complainant “must establish that [he] was
subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so pervasive that a
‘reasonable person’ in Complainant’s position would have found the conduct
to be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was
taken because of a protected basis.” Jenna P. v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC
Appeal No. 2019002007, 2020 WL 6134298, at *7 (Sept. 22, 2022).

To prevail in his claim of retaliatory harassment, Complainant must show that
he was subjected to conduct sufficient to dissuade a “reasonable person” from
making or supporting a complaint of discrimination. See Burlington N. & Santa
Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006); EEOC Enforcement Guidance on
Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, § II(B)(3) & n. 137
(Aug. 25, 2016). Only if both elements are present, retaliatory motivation and
a chilling effect on protected EEO activity, will the question of Agency liability
for reprisal-based harassment present itself. See Janeen S. v. Dep’t of Com.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120160024 (Dec. 20, 2017). Importantly, “[t]he threshold
for establishing retaliatory harassment is different than for discriminatory
hostile work environment. Retaliatory harassing conduct can be challenged
under the Burlington Northern standard even if it is not severe or pervasive
enough to alter the terms and conditions of employment.” Irvin C. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0720180024 (July 25, 2023), at *8 (quoting
EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation & Related Issues, No. 915.004, §
II.B, Ex. 17. (Aug 25, 2016). “If the conduct would be sufficiently material to
deter protected activity in the given context, even if it were insufficiently
severe or pervasive to create a hostile work environment, there would be
actionable retaliation.” EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation & Related
Issues, No. 915.004, § II.B, Ex. 17. (Aug 25, 2016).
                                      16                          2024001561

In this case, we find that Complainant’s hostile work environment claim must
fail because there is no evidence beyond his own subjective assertions that
any of the alleged incidents of harassment are due to any of his protected
bases. See Ceola K. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 2022003102 (June
22, 2023).

Contrary to Complainant’s repeated insistence on appeal, there is no evidence
in the record to support Complainant’s insistence that he was subjected to any
abuse or bullying based on either his disability or reprisal. While Complainant
emphasizes on appeal that Coworker 1 noted that he witnessed the Chief
being “derogatory” to Complainant by speaking to him as if he were a child
and the statement by another coworker that she witnessed the Chief
interrupting Complainant in an unprofessional and rude manner, at best, these
incidents indicate only that there was a contentious interpersonal relationship
between Complainant and the Chief. Such a tense interpersonal relationship
does not, however, establish that Complainant was subjected to harassment.
Nor has Complainant in any respect refuted the allegations in the letter of
warning     that he refused to follow numerous work -related specific
instructions. In particular, the record indicates that Complainant refused to
turn in the forms requested, refused to take or teach the class his manager
requested, and refused to follow her instructions on other occasions. The Chief
indicated that Complainant responded to their requests in a discourteous
manner. The Acting Chief stated that he made the decision to terminate
Complainant’s      employment      due    to     Complainant’s     inappropriate
communications with coworkers and his failure to follow instructions. He
explained that Complainant was rude to a colleague and his work on Health
Professional Trainees was unsatisfactory.

The Commission has repeatedly stated that Title VII is not a civility code and
personality clashes and other common workplace grievances “while
sometimes unpleasant, do not constitute harassment, even if done in a
confrontational manner.” Felton M. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No.
0120171203 (June 23, 2017); see also Eileen S. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120170721 (Mar. 20, 2019) (finding no hostile work environment
when, among other things, Complainant was told she “sucked” and that she
“did not perform [her] job worth a damn,” and Complainant was told in front
of other employees “you are ignorant and do not know what the hell you are
talking about”). Furthermore, we find that all the alleged incidents of
harassment are little more than routine work assignments, instructions, and
admonishments which do not arise to the level of a hostile work environment.
See Melodee M. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120142984 (Jan. 24,
2017).
                                      17                          2024001561

While Complainant insists that he was subjected to “abuse” and “bullying,”
there is no evidence to support his description of his treatment and his own
subjective perception of the various management officials’ treatment of him
does not satisfy the objective standard required to establish unlawful
harassment. See Carl T. v. Social Security Admin., EEOC Appeal No.
2022000277 (Jan. 5, 2023) (stating Title VII forbids only behavior so
objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim's employment);
Mattson v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec'y, EEOC Appeal No. 0120052563 (July 3,
2007) (stating that a hostile work environment is established by an objective
standard and not a complainant's subjective perceptions).

                                CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding that Complainant did not establish that he was subjected to
discrimination as alleged.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                       18                           2024001561

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.
                                       19                          2024001561

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 23, 2024
Date
