           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                Laurence L., 1
                                 Petitioner,

                                      v.

                              Frank Kendall,
                                Secretary,
                        Department of the Air Force,
                                 Agency.

                          Petition No. 2024004976

                      MSPB No. AT-1221-23-0096-W-I

                                 DECISION

Petitioner filed a petition with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission) seeking review of a Final Order issued
by the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB or Board) concerning his
appeal in MSPB No. AT-1221-23-0096-W-I. For the reasons that follow, we
DENY consideration of the petition.

                             ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Commission has jurisdiction to review Petitioner’s petition.

                               BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this petition, Petitioner worked as an
Equal Employment Manager at the Agency’s 20th Fighter Wing facility at
Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina. Petitioner was terminated from his
position during his probationary period on March 3, 2017.



1 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Petitioner’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024004976

In a separate MSPB appeal (MSPB No. AT-315H-17-0383-I-1) not before us
in this petition, Petitioner appealed his removal to the Board on April 3,
2017.     Petitioner then filed an equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint with the Agency on May 1, 2017, which included a claim on his
termination. A few days later, an MSPB Administrative Judge (AJ) issued an
initial decision dismissing the case for lack of Board jurisdiction, since
Petitioner was in his probationary period at the time of his removal.
Petitioner sought review of that initial decision with the full Board, which
lacked a quorum at the time and could not issue final orders for several
years.

While his petition before the full Board was pending, the Agency conducted
an   investigation    into   Petitioner’s   EEO    complaint (Agency   No.
5W1C17007TF18).        At the conclusion of the investigation, Petitioner
requested a final Agency decision on his complaint. On April 2, 2018, the
Agency issued a final decision finding no discrimination. 2

After the MSPB was again able to issue final orders, the Board granted
Petitioner’s petition for review in his MSPB appeal and remanded the
jurisdictional issue back to the MSPB AJ in May 2022. The next month, on
June 17, 2022, the MSPB AJ issued another initial decision again dismissing
Petitioner’s appeal for lack of Board jurisdiction. That initial decision became
final on July 22, 2022, after Petitioner did not file a petition for review before
the full Board.

On December 1, 2022, Petitioner filed an individual right of action (IRA)
appeal with the MSPB (the appeal at issue in this petition), this time alleging
that he was terminated during his probationary period in reprisal for
engaging in protected whistleblower activity under the Whistleblower
Protection Act (WPA) and the Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act
(WPEA). A different MSPB AJ issued an Initial Decision on March 28, 2023,
dismissing the IRA appeal for lack of jurisdiction. The MSPB AJ found that
Petitioner failed to fully exhaust his administrative remedies before the
Office of Special Counsel, and that, even if he had, he failed to make a
nonfrivolous allegation that he made a protected whistleblower disclosure.


2 Petitioner filed a civil action (3:18-cv-01792) on the EEO complaint a few

months after the Agency issued its final decision, but the district court
ultimately dismissed the civil action without prejudice because Petitioner’s
appeal in MSPB No. AT-315H-17-0383-I-1 was then currently pending before
the MSPB.
                                       3                          2024004976

Petitioner sought review of the Initial Decision before the full Board. On July
26, 2024, the Board issued a Final Order denying the petition for review and
affirming the Initial Decision’s dismissal of the IRA appeal. Petitioner then
filed the instant Petition.

                         CONTENTIONS ON PETITION

Petitioner did not file a brief in support of the petition. The Agency filed a
brief in opposition to the instant petition, arguing that because Petitioner did
not file a brief, there are no issues for review and adjudication.

                                  ANALYSIS

EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission has jurisdiction over mixed
case appeals and complaints on which the MSPB has issued a decision that
makes determinations on allegations of discrimination.           29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.303 et seq. Here, however, Petitioner’s MSPB appeal was alleging
violations of the WPA and the WEPA. The Commission has previously held
that whistleblower activities are generally outside the purview of the EEO
process. See Giannou v. Dep’t of Hous. & Urb. Dev., EEOC Request No.
05880911 (Feb. 13, 1989). The MSPB issued a Final Order finding that it
lacked jurisdiction in the matter and made no determination on any claims of
discrimination. Because the MSPB’s decision did not address any matters
within the Commission’s jurisdiction, the Commission has no jurisdiction to
review Petitioner’s case.

We note that EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) provides that a
complaint shall be dismissed if it states the same claim that is pending
before or has been decided by the agency or Commission. As described
above, the record indicates that Petitioner filed an EEO complaint regarding
his termination. Thus, there is no need for the Agency to further process
Petitioner’s claims of discrimination because such claims were adjudicated in
Agency No. 5W1C17007TF18.

                                CONCLUSION

Consequently, we DENY consideration of the petition.

          PETITIONER’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (W0124)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of
administrative appeal from the Commission’s decision.
                                       4                           2024004976

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court, based on the decision of the Merit Systems Protection Board,
within thirty (30) calendar days of the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                          __      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 26, 2024
Date
