             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013




                                       Frederick A., 1
                                       Complainant,

                                             v.

                                    Gina M. Raimondo,
                                        Secretary,
                                 Department of Commerce
                                  (Bureau of the Census),
                                         Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2023000293

                               Agency No. 63-2021-00461D

                                        DECISION

On October 17, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 28, 2022, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Equal Pay Act of 1963 (EPA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d) et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the
Agency’s final decision.

                                   ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency adequately investigated Complainant’s EPA claim.

                                     BACKGROUND

Complainant worked as a Census Field Manager (CFM) with the Philadelphia Regional Census
Center (RCC) from January 6, 2020, through July 26, 2021.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                    2023000293

During the relevant time, the Area Manager was Complainant’s first level supervisor (S1). The
Assistant Regional Census Manager was his second level supervisor (S2). Person A was the
Administrative Manager.

On August 13, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him. The Agency defined Complainant’s complaint as follows:

       1.     Complainant alleges he was subjected to harassment (non-sexual) based on race
              (White) and sex (male) when:

              a. On unspecified dates, Complainant was made to perform additional tasks
                 unlike other CFMs.

              b. Twice a week in September, October, and December 2020, Complainant was
                 forced to surrender compensatory time when working from home.

       2.     Complainant alleges discrimination based on race (White) and sex (male) when
              between January 6, 2020 – July 26, 2021, he was paid $3 less hourly than all other
              Post Enumeration Survey (PES) employees in Montgomery County,
              Pennsylvania.

       3.     Complainant alleges discrimination based on race (White) and sex (male) when
              he was terminated on July 26, 2021.

The Agency accepted Complainant’s complaint for investigation. The acceptance letter did not
indicate which federal anti-discrimination statutes were relevant to Complainant’s complaint.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.

The Agency conducted a disparate treatment analysis on claim (3). The Agency found that
Complainant did not establish a prima facie case for claim (3), because he did not identify
anyone who was similarly situated that was terminated or not terminated. The Agency noted
although Complainant alleged race and sex were factors, there was no evidence indicating race
and sex were factors. Thus, the Agency found Complainant failed to prove that his race or sex
were considered with regard to his termination. Further, the Agency found assuming
Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on race and sex, management
articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation for their actions.

Specifically, the Agency noted the evidence showed that Complainant was terminated for
“unacceptable conduct and performance.”
                                                  3                                     2023000293

Regarding Complainant’s performance, S1 stated Complainant’s lack of involvement with his
appointed zone/team caused the entire zone to underperform. S1 noted that Complainant was the
only CFM she had to have multiple conversations with regarding his performance, attendance,
and involvement with his team. Additionally, Person A stated that Complainant was terminated
for: failing to maintain situational awareness in his assigned area; failure to effectively supervise;
and failure to adhere to S2’s direction to update case progress in the requisite system. Person A
stated Complainant failed to build the required number of training classes to build his staff as
directed by the Area Manager. Person A also stated Complainant was the only CFM who could
not meet the pre-established expectations and his lack of production caused delays in getting
field representative out to the field. Moreover, the termination letter noted after discovering
Complainant had failed to follow instructions regarding disseminating badges, S1 gave him a
directive to call each of his Census Field Supervisors (CFSs) to obtain the names of their
enumerators, to sort the badges the enumerators needed to go out into the field, and to send the
badges out overnight. However, Complainant boxed up the badges and sent them to the
Regional Technician. The termination letter stated as of the date of Complainant’s termination
the CFSs still did not have their badges. It was noted when S1 confronted Complainant about the
matter, Complainant became argumentative. The Agency found Complainant failed to meet his
burden of proof to show that management was motivated by discriminatory animus toward his
race or sex.

The Agency conducted a harassment analysis on claims (1) and (2). Regarding claim (1)(a),
Complainant claimed he was subjected to unwelcome conduct when he was assigned duties other
CFMs were not assigned. He also asserted there was a pattern of racial harassment from S1, S2,
and Person A referring to him as the “Token White” guy and remarks about White privilege, and
racial epithets such as “cracker and whitey” were made around the office. The Agency found no
evidence Complainant was assigned extra duties and noted none of the witnesses verified racial
comments were heard around the office.

Regarding claim (1)(b), Complainant claimed he was required to use compensatory time when he
was working from home from September through December 2020, but no one else was required
to use compensatory time when working from home. The Agency noted that S2 stated the CFM
position was not a work-at-home position which was explained to Complainant many times. S2
stated when someone could not come to work, they were required to use leave. S1 stated she had
to speak to Complainant many times about his timesheet because it appeared he was attempting
to steal time or earn hours for which he was not entitled. Person A noted Complainant was
counseled for charging Overtime/Compensatory time without approval. Person A also noted
Complainant was counseled for not being available during work hours or responsive to
supervisory emails. Further, the Agency stated the record showed Complainant earned and used
compensatory time from August 30, 2020, through December 20, 2020.

Regarding claim (2), the Agency noted Complainant stated he was paid at a lower salary than
other PES employees and reported being paid at a lower pay scale, but management would not
correct his pay. Complainant asserted when he spoke to S1 about his pay she responded that,
“for once my White privileges won’t help me.”
                                               4                                   2023000293

The Agency stated that the record showed no evidence that Complainant was subjected to any
comments or unpleasant language regarding his race or sex and thus, he could not satisfy the
second or third elements of his prima facie case of harassment. The Agency stated the incidents
did not rise to the level of severe or pervasive necessary to constitute harassment. The Agency
stated it was unclear why Complainant’s pay was not corrected when he brought it to
management’s attention, but claimed there was no evidence his race or sex were factors. The
Agency noted absent any proof of harassment, there was no basis for imputing liability to the
employer. The Agency concluded Complainant failed to establish that he was subjected to a
hostile work environment based on his race or sex as claimed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant notes that upon being hired his pay rate was incorrect. Complainant
notes the Agency acknowledged his pay rate should have been $34.50 per hour and not the
$26.50, he was paid. Complainant states that he first experienced discrimination in 2020, when
racial epitaphs were permitted in the office and his requests to correct his pay were repeatedly
ignored. Complainant claims the record shows that others noticed he was treated and “paid
differently than other employees/Census Field Managers of a different sex and race.”
Complainant argues he still has not received the money due for the pay discrimination.
Complainant also claims that on July 26, 2021, S1 terminated his appointment without
justification. He states the Agency’s stated reason of “unacceptable conduct and performance”
was false and notes he had no negative progress reports, verbal notices, or warnings prior to
termination.

In response to Complainant’s appeal, the Agency states that even if Complainant could establish
a prima facie case of discrimination, which it argues he cannot, he did not show that the
Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions were a pretext. The Agency
claims the record supports that Complainant was not subjected to harassment when he allegedly
had to perform additional tasks, as he often requested additional work himself. The Agency also
states Complainant did not surrender compensatory time, but rather, he was adjusting his
schedule to request blanket approval for compensatory time to work from home, when
teleworking and blanket approval for compensatory time were not allowed for CFMs. Regarding
his claim of pay discrimination, the Agency states the lower hourly wage was due to
Complainant being hired during a pay rate change and the system not updating properly.
Regarding his termination, the Agency states the evidence (as described in detail above in the
Background of this decision) supports that the termination was due to unacceptable conduct and
performance issues. Finally, the Agency states Complainant did not show that the Agency’s
actions were sufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a hostile work environment.

                                         ANALYSIS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a).
                                                 5                                     2023000293

See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter
9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

Adequacy of the Record- Equal Pay Act Claim

The U.S. Supreme Court articulated the requirements for establishing a prima facie case of
discrimination under the EPA in Corning Glass Works v. Brennan, 417 U.S. 188, 195 (1974). To
establish a violation of the EPA, a complainant must show that he or she received less pay than
an individual of the opposite sex for equal work, requiring equal skill, effort and responsibility,
under similar working conditions within the same establishment. Id. at 195; Sheppard v. Equal
Emp't Opportunity Comm’n, EEOC Appeal No. 01A02919 (Sept. 12, 2000); see also 29 C.F.R. §
1620.14(a). Once a complainant has met the burden of establishing a prima facie case, an
employer may avoid liability only if it can prove that the pay difference is justified under one of
the four affirmative defenses set forth in the EPA, namely: (1) a seniority system; (2) a merit
system; (3) a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production of work (also
referred to an incentive or piecework system); or (4) a differential based on any other factor other
than sex. 29 U.S.C. § 206(d)(1); Corning Glass Works, 417 U.S. at 196-97.

The requirement of “equal work” does not mean that the jobs must be identical, but only that
they must be “substantially equal.” Corning Glass Works, 418 U.S. at 203, n. 24. In comparing
two jobs for purposes of the EPA, consideration should be given to the actual duties that the
employees are required to perform. EEOC Compliance Manual Section 10, “Compensation
Discrimination,” No. 915.003, at 10-III.E.2. (Dec. 5, 2000). Job content, not job titles or
classifications, determines the equality of jobs. Id.

After a review of the record, we find the Agency erred when it failed to address Complainant’s
EPA claim in its final decision. We note that during counseling and in his formal complaint,
Complainant claimed that he was treated differently when he was paid less than other PES
employees based on his sex. In his declaration, Complainant noted that among others, he was
paid less than Comparative 1 (Black, female), and Comparative 2 (White, female) who he stated
both held the position of CFM in the Philadelphia Region under S1’s supervision (the same
position, in the same region, under the same supervisor he had). However, it appears from the
record that the Agency failed to investigate Complainant’s EPA claim. There is no mention of
Complainant’s EPA claim in the Agency’s acceptance letter, report of investigation, or the final
decision.

We note that a different legal standard and burden of proof apply to claims of discrimination
under the EPA. We find the Agency should have also considered Complainant’s allegations in
claim (2) under the legal standard for EPA claims.
                                                6                                     2023000293

For this reason, we shall vacate the Agency’s decision and remand claim (2) for further
processing under the Equal Pay Act of 1963. Because we are remanding claim (2), we decline at
this time to adjudicate the remainder of the complaint.

Further, we note that Exhibit 33 purports to have the SF-50s of comparative CFMs reflecting pay
information. However, the names are redacted and there is no clear indication of which SF-50
corresponds to which comparative. We note the Agency has provided no reason for redacting
the names and has not claimed that it is unable to provide the names on the SF-50s. On remand,
the investigator shall obtain unredacted SF-50s.

Finally, we note that some of the declarations provided are missing pages. For example, we note
that Complainant’s declaration (Exhibit 8) is missing part of pages 10-11 and page 24 of the 28-
page declaration. Regarding the six-page declaration of Regional Technician (Exhibit 14) the
record contains multiple copies of page 6 and is missing pages 1-5. Regarding the nine-page
declaration of the Administrative Specialist (Exhibit 19), part of page 6 is not visible. Given our
decision remanding the complaint, the investigator shall obtain the missing pages.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the complaint to the
Agency for further processing in accordance with this decision and the Order herein.



                                             ORDER

Within 120 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
investigation regarding Complainant’s Equal Pay Act claim. The Agency shall obtain all
relevant evidence to address Complainant’s claim, including, but not limited to:

   a. The Agency shall conduct a supplemental investigation to develop an adequate factual
      record regarding Complainant’s EPA claim.

   b. The Agency shall ensure the investigator makes a request for pages 10-11, and 24 of
      Complainant’s declaration and place such documents in the record.

   c. The Agency shall ensure the investigator makes a request for pages 1-5 of the Regional
      Technician’s declaration and place such documents in the record.

   d. The Agency shall ensure the investigator makes a request for page 6 of the
      Administrative Specialist’s declaration and place such document in the record.
                                               7                                    2023000293

   e. The Agency shall ensure the investigator makes a request for the unredacted SF-50s
      containing the pay information for named comparatives and place such documents in the
      record.

   f. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains any other affidavits or
      documentation not specifically requested in this Order, and consistent with this opinion,
      which may be relevant in determining the merits of Complainant’s complaint.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant with a copy of
the supplemental record and findings. Complainant may, within 15 days of receipt of the
supplemental record, submit a statement concerning the supplemental record. Thereafter, within
180 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall issue a new final decision.

A copy of the additional evidence obtained pursuant to this Order and a copy of the new final
decision shall be sent to the Compliance Officer as referenced herein.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”

The report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R.
§1614.403(g). Further, the report must include evidence that the directed action has been taken.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
                                                8                                     2023000293

Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in
accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying
complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If
the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP).
                                                 9                                     2023000293

See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must
also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

    COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION-EQUAL PAY ACT (Y0408)

You are authorized under section 16(b) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (29 U.S.C. § 216(b)) to
file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction within two years or, if the violation is
willful, three years of the date of the alleged violation of the Equal Pay Act regardless of
whether you have pursued any administrative complaint processing. The filing of the civil action
will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 10                                     2023000293

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                          Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 27, 2024
Date
