             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013




                                          Alex L., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                         Bill Nelson,
                                       Administrator,
                        National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                   (Johnson Space Center),
                                          Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021004447

                                Hearing No. 460-2019-00173X

                               Agency No. NCN-18-JSC-00080

                                          DECISION

Following its August 4, 2021, final order, the Agency filed an appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission) pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.403(a). On appeal, the Agency requests that the Commission affirm its rejection of an
EEOC Administrative Judge’s (AJ) finding of discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. The Agency also requests
that the Commission affirm its rejection of the relief ordered by the AJ. For the following
reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final order.

                                    ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented concern whether the AJ properly determined that Complainant was
subjected to disparate treatment based on race when management did not select him for a
position, and whether the record was sufficiently developed to render a decision.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2021004447


                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Deputy Branch
Chief, GS-15, at the Agency’s Energy Systems Conversion Branch at the Johnson Space Center
in Houston, Texas.

On October 31, 2018, Complainant filed an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging that the Agency discriminated against him based on race (African-American) when, on
September 4, 2018, Complainant was notified that he was not selected for the position of
Manager, External Integration Office, International Space Station Program, ES-00, under
Vacancy Announcement No. JS18C0007.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an AJ. Complainant
requested a hearing. The AJ held a hearing on October 15-16, 2020, and May 11-12, 2021, and
issued a decision in favor of Complainant finding discrimination (AJ Decision and Order). The
Agency subsequently issued a final order rejecting the AJ’s finding that Complainant proved that
the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. After refusing to fully implement the
AJ’s decision, the instant appeal followed.

The AJ found that, before the position at issue was open to applicants, it had originally been
classified in the General Schedule (GS) as a GS-15 position involving similar duties but with less
authorization. The applicant selected for the position at issue (hereinafter, the Selectee) held the
GS-15 position for about three years prior to the selection. The record indicates that the Selectee
was laterally placed into the GS-15 position around November 2015, during a period when the
office switched program managers. The Selectee was therefore placed into the position either by
Program Manager A or Program Manager B (who took over for Program Manager A). In 2018,
the facility’s director upgraded the position to the Senior Executive Service (SES) at the request
of Agency management. The Selectee, therefore, already had extensive experience performing
most of the job duties by the time of the vacancy announcement.

The AJ found that Complainant’s education (a master’s degree and Ph.D. in electrical
engineering), prior experience both within and outside of the Agency, and his tenure at the
Agency “should have positioned him for a promotion.” AJ Decision and Order at 6. However,
the AJ found that the Selectee “was groomed and presumptively pre-selected for the position at
issue.” Id. Because the Selectee was outside of Complainant’s protected class, the AJ found that
Complainant established a prima facie case of race discrimination. The Agency’s legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for not selecting Complainant were that, in his application packet,
Complainant did not provide sufficient explanations of his executive core qualifications (ECQs)
or his technological qualifications to justify his selection. The AJ agreed that Complainant had
“largely summarized” his qualifications in his application, but the AJ found that Complainant’s
failure to add more “was rendered moot by the Agency’s grooming and pre-selection of [the
Selectee].” AJ Decision and Order at 6.
                                                3                                    2021004447


The AJ further determined that there were credibility issues with the Agency’s witnesses,
because, in part, their versions of events did not always align with each other or with their own
prior testimony. The AJ also noted that the selection panelists based their decision on a
“subjective ‘highly qualified’ rating” and that there were several procedural anomalies during the
selection process. AJ Decision and Order at 7. The AJ therefore concluded that the Agency had
failed to justify its actions and that its reasons for not selecting Complainant were pretext for
discrimination based on race.

The AJ’s decision then awarded Complainant various remedies, including retroactive promotion
and back pay, nonpecuniary, compensatory damages, and attorney’s fees and costs. The AJ also
ordered the Agency to post a notice regarding the finding of discrimination and to provide
training to all managerial staff at the Johnson Space Center.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, the Agency argues that we should reverse the AJ’s decision finding that the Agency
discriminated against Complainant based on race by not selecting him for the SES position of
Manager, External Integration Office. The Agency maintains that both Complainant and the AJ
agreed that the Selectee was better qualified for the position than Complainant, but that the
Selectee had an advantage in the selection process because he was earlier placed in the GS-15
position performing most of the duties of the SES position. The Agency argues that the AJ then
took “judicial notice” of the lack of African American males in SES positions at the facility and
determined that the “practice” of grooming and preselection disproportionately affected African
American males, including Complainant. The Agency argues that the AJ’s decision in this
regard failed to apply prior Commission precedent regarding preselection, converted
Complainant’s race claim into an intersectional claim based on race and sex, relied on
inappropriate statistical evidence, and made credibility determinations that the Agency believes
were irrelevant given that the Agency selected the most qualified candidate.

The Agency also contends that the AJ inappropriately accepted Complainant’s argument that the
Selectee’s qualifications gained through his experience in the GS-15 role were “not legitimately
gained.” The Agency argues that Complainant’s sparse application gave the panel no reason to
believe he was qualified for an SES position, but even assuming he was, the Agency argues that
Complainant was required to “show both that the [S]electee was groomed and that the reason for
the grooming was discriminatory” (emphasis in original).

The Agency further maintains that Complainant failed to demonstrate the Agency’s reasons for
not selecting him (i.e., that the Selectee was more qualified) were pretextual, and that the AJ’s
finding in this regard is paradoxical given her conclusion that the Selectee was first groomed for
the position, making his selection a foregone conclusion. The Agency argues that, despite this
contradiction, the AJ “pointed to a series of anomalies and inconsistencies” to indicate that the
interview panel harbored discriminatory animus. The Agency disputes the probative value of
any possible inconsistencies, arguing that they are largely irrelevant to the question of pretext
                                                  4                                     2021004447

because they are “either not a deviation from policy, not idiosyncratic, easily explained, or all
three.” The Agency therefore concludes that the AJ’s decision was not supported by substantial
evidence.

Complainant requests that we affirm the AJ’s decision in full. 2

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), all post-hearing factual findings by an AJ will be upheld if
supported by substantial evidence in the record. Substantial evidence is defined as “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.”
Universal Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 477 (1951) (citation omitted). A finding
regarding whether or not discriminatory intent existed is a factual finding. See Pullman-Standard
Co. v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 293 (1982). An AJ’s conclusions of law are subject to a de novo
standard of review, whether or not a hearing was held.

An AJ’s credibility determination based on the demeanor of a witness or on the tone of voice of a
witness will be accepted unless documents or other objective evidence so contradicts the
testimony, or the testimony so lacks in credibility that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it.
See EEO Management Directive 110 (EEO MD-110), Chapter 9, at § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015).

                                            ANALYSIS

In order to prevail in a disparate treatment claim, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that
he was subjected to an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978).
Complainant may establish a prima facie case of discrimination in the nonselection context by
showing that: (1) he is a member of a protected class; (2) he was qualified for the position; (3) he
was not selected for the position; and (4) he was accorded treatment different from that given to
persons otherwise similarly situated who are not members of his protected group. Obas v. Dep’t
of Just., EEOC Appeal No. 01A04389 (May 16, 2002); Williams v. Dep’t of Educ., EEOC
Request No. 05970561 (Aug. 6, 1998). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the
facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n. 13. The burden then shifts
to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep’t of
Cmty. Affs. v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).




2
  We note that Complainant’s brief on appeal was untimely filed and will therefore not be
considered herein. Even considering the brief, however, it would not alter our decision in the
instant matter.
                                                5                                     2021004447

Once the Agency has met its burden, Complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade
the factfinder by a preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s explanation was pretextual.
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr. v.
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993). Complainant can do this by showing that the proffered explanations
were unworthy of credence or that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the Agency.
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256. A showing that the employer’s articulated reasons were not credible
permits, but does not compel, a finding of discrimination. Hicks, 509 U.S. at 511.

We initially find that Complainant has established the first, third, and fourth elements of the
prima facie case, given that he is African American and was not selected for the position, while a
White candidate (the Selectee) was selected. As to the second element, the Agency disputes that
Complainant was qualified for the position in light of the panelists’ conclusion that Complainant
was not “ready to be submitted for a senior level position” and argues that the AJ improperly
focused on matters discounted by the panel, such as Complainant’s congressional detail and his
Ph.D. We find, however, that substantial evidence in the record supports the conclusion that
Complainant was sufficiently qualified for the position to establish a prima facie case of
discriminatory nonselection. We must therefore proceed to the ultimate question of whether the
Agency’s explanation for its actions was pretextual.

In applying this analysis, however, we find the record is insufficient to allow us to properly
evaluate the AJ’s findings and make a reasoned determination on the merits of Complainant’s
complaint of nonselection based on his race. Specifically, we find the record lacking with
respect to the issue of whether the Selectee’s preselection for the position at issue was
discriminatory, which relates to the question of whether the Agency’s reasons for selecting the
Selectee were pretextual.

We find that substantial evidence supports the AJ’s conclusion that the Selectee was groomed for
the position by being laterally reassigned to the GS-15 position in 2015 (performing similar
duties to the SES position for almost three years), and that he was therefore preselected for the
SES position. However, the Commission has repeatedly held that even if preselection occurred,
it is not unlawful unless a complainant can prove that the preselection was driven by
discriminatory animus. See Dominica V. v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182366
(Oct. 31, 2019); Roderick P. v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120170973 (Dec. 4,
2018) (citing Nickens v. NASA, EEOC Request No. 05950329 (Feb. 23, 1996); McAllister v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05931038 (July 28, 1994)).

The AJ, relying on Complainant’s arguments, found that the preselection/grooming of the
Selectee for the position was a result of the Selectee’s lateral reassignment to the similar GS-15
position, which lasted for about three years until the position was reclassified as an SES position
and open to applicants. The crucial question as to whether Complainant was discriminated
against, therefore, in part may rely on whether the lateral reassignment of the selectee to the GS-
15 position was discriminatory. The record does not contain any detailed information about the
circumstances surrounding the Selectee’s lateral reassignment, such as why the Selectee was
chosen for the lateral reassignment, why the lateral reassignment was noncompetitive, or why the
                                              6                                  2021004447

position was not a “rotational experience,” as Complainant argued during the hearing. Neither
Program Manager A nor Program Manager B submitted affidavits during the investigation or
were called as witnesses during the hearing. We therefore do not have sufficient evidence to
determine whether the selection for the SES position, which was apparently at least partially
predicated on the Selectee’s lateral reassignment, was in fact motivated by discriminatory
animus.

Based on the foregoing, we find that the record was not adequately developed. An appropriate
factual record is one that allows a reasonable factfinder to draw conclusions as to whether a
violation of the discrimination statute occurred. Therefore, the Commission will remand this
matter for a supplemental investigation to examine whether the Agency’s grooming and/or
preselection of the Selectee—by laterally reassigning him to the GS-15 Manager position before
its reclassification to a SES position—was based on race discrimination.

                                       CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND Complainant’s complaint
to the Agency for further processing in accordance with the Order herein.

                           ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD

Within 120 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a supplemental
investigation to include, but not limited to, why and how the Agency laterally reassigned the
Selectee to the position of Manager, External Integration Office, International Space Station
Program, GS-15, on or around November 2015. This investigation shall encompass the
following elements:

       1. Whether Program Manager A or Program Manager B made the decision to laterally
          reassign the Selectee to the position;

       2. Whether the deciding Program Manager was aware of Complainant’s and/or the
          Selectee’s race;

       3. Whether other Agency employees were considered for the lateral reassignment;

       4. Whether there was any discussion about awarding the lateral reassignment on a
          rotational or competitive basis; and

       5. Any other pertinent information that the investigation reveals regarding the
          circumstances surrounding the lateral reassignment.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant with a copy of
the supplemental record and findings. The Complainant may, within 15 days of receipt of the
supplemental record, submit a statement concerning the supplemental record. Thereafter, the
Agency shall issue a new final decision on the merits of Complainant’s complaint within 180
                                                7                                     2021004447

days of the date this decision is issued. A copy of the additional evidence obtained pursuant to
this Order and a copy of the new final decision shall be sent to the Compliance Officer as
referenced herein.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                                 8                                     2021004447

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
                                                9                                    2021004447

facility or department in which you work.           Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 22, 2024_
Date
