             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Tristan S., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                   Denis R. McDonough,
                                         Secretary,
                               Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2024002348

                             Agency No. 200H-761-2023-154268

                                         DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) from the Agency’s decision dated January 26, 2024, dismissing his complaint of
unlawful employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment
Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision.

                                    ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether Complainant’s complaint was properly dismissed for failure to
state a claim.

                                      BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Pharmacist at the
Northeast Veterans Affairs Consolidated Mail Order Pharmacy (CMOP) in Chelmsford,
Massachusetts.

On September 13, 2023, Complainant initiated contact with an EEO Counselor regarding
unlawful discrimination.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2024002348

When the matter was not resolved, Complainant filed a formal complaint of discrimination on
October 23, 2023. The Agency defined Complainant’s complaint as alleging discrimination
based on age (over 40) and in reprisal for protected EEO activity when:

       On April 28, 2023, Complainant was removed from his role as a Pharmacist with the
       Agency.

On January 26, 2024, the Agency issued a decision dismissing the complaint pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2) for untimely EEO Counselor contact. The Agency noted Complainant
indicated the matter was brought to the attention of the Case Manager in his prior EEO
complaint. However, the Agency stated EEO training records supported that Complainant was
aware of the 45-day time limit and how to seek EEO Counseling. The Agency determined the
event at issue was a discrete act that was not raised within 45 days of occurrence and thus,
dismissed the complaint. Additionally, the Agency dismissed the complaint pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) for failure to state a claim, finding that Complainant was not an
employee of the Agency as defined under the federal anti-discrimination statutes.

The instant appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant contests the Agency’s dismissal for untimeliness. Complainant states
that he made efforts to file his claim within the required 45-day time period. Specifically, he
notes that after he was terminated on April 28, 2023, he contacted an EEO Counselor/Case
Manager, who was involved with his prior EEO complaint, on May 1, 2023, to file his claim of
retaliation concerning the Agency interfering with his employment.

The Agency does not provide a statement in response to Complainant’s appeal.


                                  STANDARD OF REVIEW

The Agency’s decision to dismiss a complaint is subject to de novo review by the Commission,
which requires the Commission to examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker and issue its decision based on the Commission’s
own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law. The Commission should construe
the complaint in the light most favorable to the complainant and take the complaint’s allegations
as true. Thus, all reasonable inferences that may be drawn from the complaint’s allegations must
be made in favor of the complainant.
                                                3                                     2024002348

                                           ANALYSIS

Untimely EEO Counselor Contact

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §1614.105(a)(1) provides that an aggrieved person must initiate
contact with an EEO Counselor within 45 days of the date of the matter alleged to be
discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel action, within 45 days of the effective date of the
action. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2) provides for the dismissal of complaints
where the complainant did not initiate contact with an EEO Counselor within 45 days of the date
of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel action, within 45 days of
the effective date of the action. The Commission has adopted a “reasonable suspicion” standard
(as opposed to a “supportive facts” standard) to determine when the 45-day limitation period is
triggered. See Junior T. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2023002297 (Apr. 27, 2023)
(citing Howard v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05970852 (Feb. 11, 1999)). Thus, the
time limitation is not triggered until a Complainant reasonably suspects discrimination, but
before all the facts that support a charge of discrimination have become apparent.

Where, as here, there is an issue of timeliness, “[a]n agency always bears the burden of obtaining
sufficient information to support a reasoned determination as to timeliness.” Guy v. Dep’t of
Energy, EEOC Request No. 05930703 (Jan. 4, 1994) (quoting Williams v. Dep’t of Defense,
EEOC Request No. 05920506 (Aug. 25, 1992)). In addition, in Ericson v. Dep’t of the Army,
EEOC Request No. 05920623 (Jan. 14, 1993)), the Commission stated “the agency has the
burden of proving evidence and/or proof to support its final decisions,” see also Gens v. Dep’t of
Defense, EEOC Request No. 05910837 (Jan. 31, 1992

The Commission has previously held that an agency may not dismiss a complaint based on a
Complainant’s untimeliness, if that untimeliness is caused by the Agency's action in misleading
or misinforming the complainant. See Wilkinson v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No.
05950205 (Mar. 25, 1996). See also Elijah v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Request No. 05950632
(Mar. 28, 1996) (if agency officials misled complainant into waiting to initiate EEO counseling,
agency must extend time limit for contacting EEO Counselor).

Upon review, the Commission finds that the Agency improperly dismissed Complainant’s
complaint for untimely EEO Counselor contact. The evidence shows Complainant contacted the
Case Manager on May 1, 2023, regarding a claim that he was terminated in April 2023, in
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity. The record reflects the Case Manager understood this
to be a request to amend his prior EEO complaint to include a new claim, as evidenced by the
Case Manager’s email that the prior complaint could not be amended. The Case Manager told
Complainant he did not have standing to file and told him to contact the supervisor at his
contract employer or to file a complaint with the state of Massachusetts. We find this was
improper. The Case Manager should have informed Complainant he could pursue the EEO
process on the new matter and then if the Agency determined he did not have standing, it could
have dismissed the matter for failure to state a claim.
                                                4                                     2024002348

We determine that the Agency failed to meet its burden to support its determination that
Complainant failed to timely contact an EEO Counselor. We find that Complainant evidenced
an intent to initiate the EEO process on May 1, 2023, rendering his EEO contact timely for his
April 28, 2023 termination.

Complainant states that on September 6, 2023, during the pre-hearing conference on his prior
complaint, he requested the EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) include his claim of reprisal with
the prior complaint. According to Complainant, the AJ advised him to file his reprisal claim
with an EEO Counselor. Thus, Complainant stated on September 13, 2023, he initiated contact
with a new EEO Counselor on the instant complaint.

Failure to State a Claim

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(a) provides that complaints of employment
discrimination shall be processed in accordance with Part 1614 of the EEOC regulations. EEOC
Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(c) provides that within the covered departments, agencies and
units, Part 1614 applies to all employees and applicants for employment. An agency shall accept
a complaint from any aggrieved employee or applicant for employment who believes that he or
she has been discriminated against by that agency because of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, age, disabling condition or reprisal. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.103, 1614.106(a). The issue here
is whether the Agency can be considered Complainant’s joint employer within the meaning of
the 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 administrative EEO complaint process.

In Serita B. v. Department of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150846 (November 10, 2016),
the Commission reaffirmed its long-standing position on “joint employers” and noted it is found
in numerous sources. See, e.g., EEOC Compliance Manual, Section 2 “Threshold Issues”
(Compliance Manual), No. 915.003, Section 2-III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) (May 12, 2000); EEOC
Enforcement Guidance: Application of EEO Laws to Contingent Workers Placed by Temporary
Employment Agencies and Other Staffing Firms (Enforcement Guidance), “Coverage Issues,”
Question 2 (Dec. 3, 1997); Ma v. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389
& 01962390 (May 29, 1998). We reiterate the analysis set forth in those decisions and guidance
documents in this decision.

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each exercise sufficient control
of an individual to qualify as the worker’s employer. Compliance Manual, Section 2-
III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). To determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise sufficient control,
EEOC considers factors derived from common law principles of agency. See Enforcement
Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2.

EEOC considers: the Agency’s right to control when, where, and how the worker performs the
job; the right to assign additional projects to the worker; whether the work is performed on
Agency premises; whether the Agency provides the tools, material, and equipment to perform
the job; the duration of the relationship between the Agency and the worker; whether the Agency
controls the worker’s schedule; and whether the Agency can discharge the worker.
                                                  5                                     2024002348

Compliance Manual, Section 2-III(A)(1) (citations omitted); see Ma, EEOC Appeal Nos.
01962389 & 01962390.

In determining a worker’s status, EEOC looks to what actually occurs in the workplace. In
assessing the right to control, EEOC does not consider any one factor to be decisive and
emphasizes that it is not necessary to satisfy a majority of the factors. In particular, the fact that
an individual performs work pursuant to a contract between the federal government and an
outside organization and is paid and provided with benefits by that organization, on its own, is
not enough to show that joint employment does not exist. Rather, the analysis is holistic. All the
circumstances in the individual’s relationship with the agency should be considered to determine
if the agency should be deemed the worker’s joint employer. Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage
Issues,” at Questions 1 and 2. In sum, a federal agency will qualify as a joint employer of an
individual if it has the requisite right to control the means and manner of the individual's work,
regardless of whether the individual is paid by an outside organization or is on the federal
payroll. See id., at Question 2.

We note that an especially significant factor in determining whether the Agency controlled
Complainant’s position was whether it had the power to terminate him. An Agency’s power to
terminate an individual’s services is tantamount to removal power where the contractor engaged
the individual solely to provide services to the agency, and, once the agency terminated the
individual's services, the contractor also cut off its relationship with the individual. See
Complainant v. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120090933 (June 3, 2009).

Upon review, we find the record is not sufficiently developed to make a determination as to
whether the Agency is a joint employer for the purpose of using the 29 C.F.R. Part 1614
complaint process. Complainant alleges that he was terminated by the Agency based on his age
and in reprisal for his protected EEO activity. We acknowledge that some of the evidence in the
file indicates that the contractor had control over Complainant’s position such as paying
Complainant’s wages and providing him benefits. However, the record also reflects the Agency
maintained some control over Complainant’s position. For example, Complainant worked at an
Agency facility and used Agency computers and equipment.

Regarding whether the Agency has the right to control when, where, and how the worker
performs the job, the Agency’s Associate Director stated in a February 8, 2023 Memorandum
that the Agency, “requires the DLH contractor to supply sufficient staff to perform a specific job
in which the local DLH Facility Manager supervis[es] the employee.” Complaint File at 000080.
In contrast, Complainant states on appeal that the Agency had “the absolute right to control in
assigning workstations I was to perform the verification of prescriptions.” We find the record
lacking sufficient evidence addressing the details of who had actual control over Complainant’s
position and the day-to-day work he performed. Further, Complainant states on appeal that the
Agency had the right to assign additional projects. Specifically, Complainant notes he was
trained to perform tasks in specialized stations such as BULK/SKUB (undefined) and Exception
stations.
                                                6                                     2024002348

Although the Associate Director stated the Agency did not have the right to assign additional
projects, we note her response did not address the additional specific tasks identified by
Complainant. Regarding the Agency setting the hours of work and duration of the job,
Complainant states the Agency set the schedules and that he worked within the Agency hours of
operation of 5:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. In contrast, the Associate Director stated, “DLH provides
staff to meet the needs of the organization,” which we note does not address who set
Complainant’s hours of work or the duration of that work.

Additionally, we note that in response to the factor of whether or not the work is considered part
of the regular business of the employer, Complainant states on appeal the Northeast Veterans
Affairs CMOP’s regular business was mail order pharmacy, and notes his work involved
verifying medications so they were mailed out to veterans across the country. The Associate
Director stated, “DLH provides staff to meet the needs of the organization. The facility is not the
worker’s employer.” Complaint file at 000081. Again, we note this does not address the
relevant inquiry of whether the work was considered part of the regular business of the Agency.

As set forth above, we have insufficient information in the record and are not able to ascertain
based on the record before us whether the Agency should be deemed a joint employer for EEO
purposes. Further, the Agency has failed to provide a contract in the record either between the
Agency and Complainant, the Agency and DLH, or DLH and Complainant.

While Complainant ultimately bears the burden to prove discrimination, it is the burden of the
Agency to have evidence or proof in support of its final decision. See Marshall v. Dep’t of the
Navy, EEOC Request No. 05910685 (Sept. 6, 1991). The Agency has not met its burden here.
Based on the foregoing, we find that the record is not sufficiently developed to make a
determination as to whether the Agency is a joint employer.

                                         CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision dismissing Complainant’s complaint is VACATED
and the complaint is REMANDED to the Agency for a supplemental investigation in accordance
with this decision and the Order herein.

                                             ORDER

Within 60 days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall take the following actions:

   1. Conduct a supplemental investigation to obtain evidence consistent with this decision in
      assessing whether the Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes. The Agency shall
      supplement the record with a copy of any contract between DLH and the Agency, DLH
      and Complainant, or the Agency and Complainant.

   2. The evidentiary record shall also include affidavits from relevant Agency officials
      including the Critical Equipment and Automation Manager, identified in the EEO
                                                7                                      2024002348

       Counselor’s Report as a responsible management official. These affidavits shall address,
       in detail, the control Agency officials had over Complainant’s position including, but not
       limited to, the areas of assigning duties, setting the hours of work and duration of the job,
       and providing direction and feedback pertaining to Complainant’s performance. The
       Agency shall obtain affidavits from any other officials that appear to have knowledge of
       these matters.

   3. The Agency shall obtain an affidavit from Complainant addressing, in detail, the control
      Agency officials had over his position including, but not limited to, the areas of assigning
      him duties, setting the hours of work and duration of the job, and providing direction and
      feedback pertaining to his performance.

   4. The Agency shall obtain affidavits from relevant officials from DLH, such as the local
      DLH Facility Manager, to the extent they cooperate. The affidavits shall address, in
      detail, the control Agency officials had over Complainant's position including, but not
      limited to, the areas of assigning duties, setting the hours of work and duration of the job,
      and providing direction and feedback pertaining to Complainant’s performance.

   5. The Agency shall either issue a new final decision either dismissing the formal
      complaint, with an appropriate analysis of relevant facts with appeal rights to the
      Commission, or a letter accepting Complainant's complaint for investigation.

A copy of the supplemental investigation and the new dismissal letter or letter of acceptance
shall be provided as set forth herein in the section entitled “Implementation of the Commission's
Decision.”

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408.
                                                8                                     2024002348

A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the
deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a
civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                 9                                     2024002348

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                              Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations



July 3, 2024
Date
