               U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                               Washington, DC 2001



                                           Lydia W., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Janet L. Yellen,
                                            Secretary,
                                   Department of the Treasury
                                   (Internal Revenue Service),
                                             Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021005245

                                 Hearing No. 451-2018-00049X

                                   Agency No. IRS-17-0697-F

                                           DECISION

On September 29, 2021, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
September 9, 2021, final order concerning her 2 equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we VACATE the Agency’s
final order and REMAND the matter for further processing.

                                      ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the AJ’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the Agency was
appropriate, or whether genuine disputes of material fact exist that require a hearing.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
2
 We note that through the record, including in her response to the proposed summary judgment
and in her appellate brief, Complainant uses both she/her and they/them pronouns interchangeably.
For sake of consistency within this decision, we shall use the pronouns she/her.
                                                 2                                     2021005245

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Customer Service
Representative at the Agency’s Wage and Investment Service Center in Austin, Texas.

On September 12, 2017, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of sex (gender identity/transgender) 3 and disability (spinal
cord injury) when she was terminated during her probationary period from her position as a
Customer Service Representative, effective July 5, 2017.

The investigation into the complaint revealed that Complainant was hired on October 31, 2016,
subject to a one-year probationary period. At the time of Complainant’s hire, she was using her
legal male birth name on official documents. However, she asked that individuals use her preferred
female name in communications with her. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 127. 4 Complainant’s
daily duties included answering taxpayer incoming phone calls, processing phone and written
correspondence on taxpayer inquiries, researching accounts, and making account adjustments.
ROI at 180. After completing new hire training, Complainant moved onto paper cases on January
31, 2017. ROI at 212.

Supervisory Contact Representative (Supervisor 1) was Complainant’s supervisor for about 4
months. ROI at 131; 156. On March 6, 2017, Complainant failed to pass Part A of the certification
assessment. As a result, she was provided personalized, one-on-one, assistance from March 6,
2017 to March 27, 2017. On March 27, 2017, Complainant also failed Part B of the certification
assessments. On March 30, 2017, Complainant was given the alternative certification process, and
received additional personalized, one-on-one assistance to address areas in need of improvement.
Complainant did not pass the alternative process either. ROI at 212.

On April 19, 2017, Supervisor 1 provided Complainant with a document memorializing a
conversation that Supervisor 1 and Complainant had regarding the need to pass Part A and B
certifications, Complainant’s additional training, and the minimums expected of Complainant’s
work.


3
  In Bostock v. Clayton Cty., the Supreme Court held that discrimination based on sexual
orientation or transgender status is prohibited under Title VII. 590 U.S. ___, 140 S. Ct. 1731
(2020); see also Baldwin v. Dep’t of Transp., EEOC Appeal No. 0120133080 (July 15, 2015) (an
allegation of discrimination based on sexual orientation states a claim of sex discrimination under
Title VII because sexual orientation is inherently a sex-based consideration).
4
  Complainant noted that her male birth name is her legal name. ROI at 127. Once she informed
the Agency of her preferred name, management largely referred to her in documents in this order:
birth first name, preferred first name, last name. In at least one document, Supervisor 1 listed
Complainant’s name as only her birth and last name. ROI at 147. In a few documents, Complainant
either initialed or signed using her birth and last name. There is, however, no indication that
Complainant changed her name legally to her preferred name during the relevant time.
                                                 3                                      2021005245

Supervisor 1 addressed the document to Complainant using Complainant’s birth name, preferred
first name, and last name. The following day, Complainant acknowledged receipt of the document
using the initials of her birth name and last name. ROI at 136.

On May 10, 2017, Supervisor 1 provided Complaint with a OF-4b Supplement document, which
referenced Complainant by her birth name and last name. The subject matter concerned
Complainant’s attendance and reminded Complainant to input her time accurately. Complainant
acknowledged and signed the document on May 20, 2017, using her birth name and last name.
ROI at 147.

On May 23, 2017, Supervisor 1 provided Complainant with another document, again listing
Complainant’s birth name, preferred first name, and last name and referring to Complainant by
her birth name. The remarks provided a very detailed breakdown of Complainant’s work
performance to date, including cases done well, her additional assistance, and cases that were
returned to her by the Quality team due to errors that needed correction. In the document,
Supervisor 1 repeatedly referred to Complainant by her preferred name a total of 29 times. 5
Complainant acknowledged the document on April 20, 2017, using the initials of her birth name
and her last name. ROI at 138.

On June 3, 2017, Supervisor 1 recommended Complainant’s removal. The reasons listed were, “1.
The employee fails to meet established performance standards in one or more critical elements of
his/her job. 2. Failure to Follow management Directives or Instructions. ROI at 213. Amongst
conduct related concerns, the document cited to the assessment failures in March 2017. The
document listed Supervisor 1 as Complainant’s first level manager. The document was digitally
signed with a first and second level signature, although the names are illegible. ROI at 212-213.

Sometime in June 2017, Complainant was reassigned to Supervisory Contact Representative’s
(Supervisor 2) team. On June 13, 2017, Supervisor 2 provided Complainant with a New Hire –
Non certification – Application 212 4th Opportunity document regarding her work performance.
ROI at 215. Supervisor 2 detailed Complainant’s progress so far, noting that: she did not pass
Assessments A and B. Additionally, Supervisor 2 noted that Complainant was unsuccessful on six
of the nine calls that were monitored. Supervisor 2 reminded Complainant that she must
demonstrate a fully successfully rating in her performance, and that failure to do so could result in
termination during her probationary period. Id. Supervisor 2 stated that Complainant would be
provided with a fourth opportunity for development and detailed what kind of coaching
Complainant would be receiving.


5
  On April 18, 2017, the Union filed a grievance on behalf of several employees, including
Complainant. Regarding Complainant, the Union stated that she was being discriminated against
by Supervisor 1 who constantly refused to use Complainant’s preferred name, used the wrong
pronouns, and told employees to essentially not assist her. ROI at 83. Complainant later argued on
the appeal that this grievance led to continued harassment and asserted that the excessive use of
her preferred name was clearly done with hostility.
                                               4                                    2021005245

Complainant was provided with an additional 12 hours of on-the-job training, and 5 hours of
directed read time, which including taxpayer authentication procedures. ROI at 198; 215.

On June 16, 2017, Complainant took a phone call regarding a request for notification of a non-
filing. ROI at 192. On June 23, 2017, Supervisor 2 provided Complainant with an Unauthorized
Disclosure Counseling regarding the June 16, 2017, call, which stated:

       There was not an open account issue at the time of the call. Per IRM 21.1.3.2.3(8),
       High Risk Authentication, as outlined in IRM 21.2.3.2.4, was mandatory in order
       to provide the requested account information. The taxpayer did not pass high-risk
       authentication. Despite this you mailed a letter of non-filing to the taxpayer’s
       address.

ROI at 192.

According to Supervisor 2, Complainant committed an “unauthorized disclosure” when she
provided account information to an unauthorized party. ROI at 192. Supervisor 2 noted that the
“impact of this act cannot be overstated. By disclosing taxpayer account information to an
unauthorized party, [Complainant] placed taxpayer account security at risk.” ROI at 192. The
counseling document informed Complainant that further unauthorized disclosures during her
probationary period could lead to termination. ROI at 192.

On June 23, 2017, Complainant made a second unauthorized disclosure. ROI at 189; 199.
Specifically, a taxpayer’s mother called requesting information on her 18-year-old son’s W2.
Complainant released the requested information. Complainant acknowledged making the
disclosure but argued that it was not improper as the information was released to the taxpayer’s
mother, who was listed on the account. ROI at 131. Supervisor 2 disagreed with Complainant’s
assessment.

After learning of the second disclosure, Supervisor 2 recommended Complainant’s removal on
June 30, 2017. Complainant had been on Supervisor 2’s team for less than one month. ROI at 193;
198. Department Manager concurred and elevated the matter to Operations Manager, who was the
deciding official. ROI at 168; 181. Department Manager and Operations Manager determined that
Complainant intentionally failed to protect the taxpayers’ right of privacy by committing an
unauthorized disclosure. ROI at 168; 170.

On July 5, 2017, Operations Manager issued Complainant a removal letter, which addressed
Complainant by her birth and preferred first names. Operations Manager cited Complainant’s
intentional disclosure of taxpayer information to an unauthorized person on June 23, 2017, as the
sole reason for the removal action. Complainant acknowledged the removal letter by signing her
birth and preferred first name, and her last name. ROI at 189. Supervisor 1 was no longer in
Complainant’s chain of command, involved in, or mentioned in the decision to terminate
Complainant. ROI at 158.
                                                 5                                      2021005245

During the EEO investigation, Department Manager explained that the termination was based on
the unauthorized disclosure referenced in the removal letter. Department Manager also stated that
in the last two years, he had not terminated any employees for similar or the same conduct as this
was “the only time this type of performance deficiency ha[d] been elevated to [him].” ROI at 186.
Department Manager also noted that the termination also came after four separate certification
attempts, and two unauthorized disclosures made during the 4th opportunity for development. ROI
at 182-186.

Operations Manager emphasized that the unauthorized disclosure referenced in the removal letter
was not the first incident and that despite counseling, Complainant continued to improperly
disclose taxpayer information to unauthorized parties. Operations Manager stated that
Complainant had violated the Agency’s policies on Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights; Guidance on
Disclosure, and Retention Standards. Operations Manager stated that in the last two years, she had
not terminated any employees for the same or similar conduct. ROI at 171-176.

Complainant, however, noted that she was terminated just one week after making the mistake, and
that prior to the termination she was initially told that she could get assistance to learn about the
procedures better. In arguing that the Agency’s rationale for removing was pretext for
discrimination, Complainant provided a list of nine allegedly similarly situated employees that she
claimed also made unauthorized disclosures but were not terminated during their probationary
periods. ROI at 130; 132.

Ultimately, the EEO Investigator did not ask Supervisor 2 about the nine comparators, and only
questioned Supervisor 1, Department Manager, and Operations Manager regarding the nine
comparators. The EEO Investigator informed the officials that the comparators were identified as
having disclosed taxpayer information to unauthorized individuals, or made similar errors to
Complainant, but were not terminated. The EEO Investigator then asked each official to identify
the comparators’ supervisor, job title, pay location, sexual orientation and/or gender identity,
medical condition, whether they were on their probationary period, and why they were not
terminated. Each official answered the questions. ROI at 162; 173; 184.

Supervisor 1 explained that she was not aware of any of the employees as she never managed
them. ROI at 163.

Department Manager provided the first line supervisor, job title/location but did not know the
sexual orientation and/or gender identity, medical condition of the nine. He was aware of four of
the comparators being in their probationary period. ROI at 184-186.

Operations Manager provided the nine comparators’ first line supervisor, job title/location, and
probationary status. For each of the nine, Operations Manager stated that she was unaware of the
employee’s sexual orientation/gender identity; medical condition; and could not speak to whether
or not the employee was terminated. ROI at 173-175.
                                                 6                                      2021005245

Supervisor 1, Department Manager, and Operations Manager did not claim to have any supervisory
role over the nine employees. ROI at 162; 173; 184.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the ROI
and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.

On August 11, 2021, the AJ issued a Notice of Proposed Summary Judgment (Notice). The AJ
stated that upon review of the record, there appeared to be no issues of material fact or credibility
to be determined at a hearing. In reaching this conclusion the AJ stated that she viewed the
evidence in the light most favorable to Complainant. The AJ determined that Complainant failed
to present any evidence to show that similarly situated employees outside her protected classes
were treated more favorably. Thus, Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of disparate
treatment on any protected basis. Further, even if Complainant could establish a prima facie case
of discrimination, the AJ determined that the Agency articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory
reasons for the alleged actions. Specifically, Complainant was terminated during her probationary
period when she committed an unauthorized disclosure. Ultimately, the AJ determined that
Complainant failed to demonstrate that management’s decision to terminate her during her
probationary period was pretext for discrimination. Accordingly, the AJ proposed to issue
summary judgment in favor of the Agency and provided the parties with an opportunity to respond.
Both parties timely responded.

While the Agency requested that the AJ effectuate the Notice, Complainant filed a detailed
response. In her August 26, 2021, Response to the Proposed Summary Judgment (Response),
Complainant argued that she needed additional discovery to establish that similarly situated
employees, at least nine so far, were treated more favorably. Complainant stated that with
additional discovery she could demonstrate disparities through evaluative records of other
probationary employees. Complainant asserted that there were other probationary employees who
also committed procedural disclosure errors but were not terminated like her. Complainant also
requested additional discovery to show that many more probationary employees were not
terminated for similar violations.

Complainant noted that she only had information on two employees, Comparator 1 (C1) and
Comparator 2 (C2) but felt that more could be obtained. Complainant argued that it was clear that
C1 and C2, who she asserted worked under Operations Manager, also made disclosure errors, but
were not terminated. Response at 4. In support, Complainant provided the September 2017
performance reviews for C1 and C2, which both indicated that C1 and C2 failed to perform high-
risk authentications.

On August 30, 2021, the AJ issued her decision stating that after considering the responses, and
for all the reasons stated in the Notice of Proposed Summary Judgment, that she was finding in
favor of the Agency. The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that
Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.
Complainant then filed the instant appeal.
                                                 7                                     2021005245

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant asserts that the AJ erred in issuing summary judgment in favor of the
Agency. Complainant states that the record was not fully developed and therefore the issuance of
a decision without a hearing was improper. In so arguing, Complainant maintains, in relevant part,
that she provided the Agency a list of nine individuals who allegedly also committed procedural
and disclosure errors and yet were not terminated. ROI at 122; 133. Complainant states that despite
providing this information, the information was not fully investigated, as the EEO Investigator
failed to obtain the gender identification and disability statuses of the nine individuals she named
as comparators. Complainant also argues that she should be allowed discovery to find further
information regarding all employees that were supervised by the management officials.

Additionally, Complainant argues that Supervisor 1 clearly discriminated and retaliated against
her. In this regard, Complainant explains that on April 18, 2017, the Union filed a grievance on
behalf of several employees, which, in relevant part, accused Supervisor 1 of discriminating
against Complainant by using the wrong pronouns, refusing to use her preferred name, and
essentially telling employees not to assist her. ROI at 83. Complainant asserts that Supervisor 1
then retaliated against her by issuing her an April 19, 2017, performance remark that included both
her legal birth and preferred name, but then specifically addressed her using her birth name. ROI
at 136. In alleging discrimination, Complainant points to a May 23, 2017 document in which
Supervisor 1 used her preferred name 29 times, which she argues is excessive and demonstrative
of animus. Complainant also asserts that Supervisor 1 forced her to initial documents using her
male initials. Complainant argues that the discriminatory practices clearly started with Supervisor
1 but were continued by Supervisor 2, Department Manager, and Operations Manager when she
was terminated.

Lastly, Complainant cites to the July 5, 2017, termination notice as further indication that her
preferred name was not respected. The July 5, 2017, termination notice included both her birth and
preferred first names. ROI at 189. Overall, Complainant argues that the matter was not appropriate
for summary judgment and requests that the Commission remand the matter for a hearing.

In response, the Agency asserts that Complainant’s appellate brief only makes vague assertions
that summary judgment was improper but fails to cite specifics as to how the AJ erred. Overall,
the Agency requests that we affirm its final order.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
                                                  8                                     2021005245

and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when he or she finds that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). An issue of fact is “genuine”
if the evidence is such that a reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-moving
party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d
103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect the outcome of the
case. In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual
conclusions, and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a)(stating that a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on
a de novo review…”); see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an
administrative judge’s determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself,
will both be reviewed de novo).

                                            ANALYSIS

Summary Judgment

We must determine whether the AJ appropriately issued the decision without a hearing. The
Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding that there
is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision without a hearing
regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. The
U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge determines no genuine
issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby,
Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment motion, the judge is to determine
whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to weighing the evidence. Id. at 249. At the
summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the non-moving party’s evidence and must draw
justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one
that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S.
317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material”
fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a case.

In this matter, Complainant raised concerns that she was treated differently from, at least nine,
similarly situated comparators. She noted that she only had some information regarding two
comparators, C1 and C2, but that a thorough investigation could possibly reveal additional
pertinent information regarding the nine and possibly others within management’s chain of
command.

Here, the EEO Investigator only interviewed Supervisor 1, Department Manager, and Operations
Manager about the nine comparators. In the line of questioning, the EEO Investigator asked if the
officials knew of the nine comparators’ supervisor, job title, pay location, sexual orientation and/or
gender identity, medical condition, whether they were on their probationary period, and why they
were not terminated. We find the EEO Investigator’s questions to be inadequate.
                                                  9                                     2021005245

We note that the EEO Investigator did not ask the full chain of command of the comparators; did
not ask if any Unauthorized Disclosure counseling notes were issued to the identified comparators;
and if Unauthorized Disclosure counseling notes were issued, whether any actions were taken and
why. The record is also lacking on whether there is an official process for handling unauthorized
disclosures at the Agency. Notably, the EEO Investigator also failed to interview Supervisor 2 or
the nine identified comparators.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. Based on the record, we do not find that the record has not been adequately
developed. We note that the hearing process is intended to be an extension of the investigative
process, designed to ensure that the parties have “a fair and reasonable opportunity to explain and
supplement the record and, in appropriate instances, to examine and cross-examine witnesses.”
See EEO MD-110, 7-1; see also 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(e). “Truncation of this process, while
material facts are still in dispute and the credibility of witnesses is still ripe for challenge,
improperly deprives Complainant of a full and fair investigation of her claims.” Bang v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01961575 (March 26, 1998). See also Peavley v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Request No. 05950628 (October 31, 1996); Chronister v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request
No. 05940578 (April 25, 1995). In summary, we find that there are simply too many unresolved
issues which require an assessment as to the credibility of the various management officials.
Therefore, judgment as a matter of law for the Agency should not have been granted in this matter.

New Claim Raised on Appeal

Lastly, we address Complainant’s appellate concern regarding Supervisor 1’s use of her birth name
and frequent mis-gendering of her pronouns. The Commission’s regulations allow a complainant
to amend a complaint at any time prior to the conclusion of the investigation to include issues or
claims like or related to those raised in the complaint. Additionally, after requesting a hearing, a
complainant may file a motion with the EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) to amend a complaint
to include issues or claims like or related to those raised in the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(d).

In this matter, Complainant alleges on appeal that Supervisor 1’s inclusion of her birth and
preferred names, and reference to her birth name on various occasions was discriminatory and
harassing. The Commission would normally find it inappropriate to address these claims for the
first time on appeal as Complainant did not raise these allegations either prior to the conclusion of
the investigation, or with the AJ during the hearing process. However, as we are remanding the
matter for a supplemental investigation regarding the comparators, we find it suitable to expand
the investigation to address Complainant’s claim that Supervisor 1 intentionally mis-gendered her
and inappropriately used her birth name.

                                          CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final order and REMAND the case for further processing
in accordance with this decision and the ORDER below.
                                                10                                     2021005245

                                             ORDER

Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency is directed to
submit a renewed hearing request on Complainant's behalf, upload the complaint file, and a copy
of this appellate decision, to the Hearings Unit at EEOC San Antonio Field Office. The Agency
shall provide written notification to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth below that the
complaint file has been transmitted to the Hearings Unit. Thereafter, the Administrative Judge
shall conduct a supplemental investigation regarding the identified comparators regarding
Complainant’s termination claim and also investigate Complainant’s claim that Supervisor 1
intentionally mis-gendered her and inappropriately used her birth name. After the supplemental
investigation has been conducted, the AJ shall hold a hearing and issue a decision on the complaint,
in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109 and the Agency shall issue a final action in accordance
with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the statement
entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall include supporting
documentation verifying that the above-stated actions have been undertaken.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                                 11                                     2021005245

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in support
of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                                  12                                      2021005245

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                     Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 2, 2024
Date
