             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                           Tien E., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                    Denis R. McDonough,
                                          Secretary,
                                Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2023001451

                                Hearing No. 570-2022-00728X

                              Agency No. 200J-V112-2021105014

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s December 9, 2022 final
order concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s
final order and REMANDS the matter for further processing.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the Agency properly framed and investigated the disparate impact
claim raised herein.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Addiction
Therapist (GS-09) at the Agency’s Jesse Brown Medical Center in Chicago, Illinois.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2023001451

On October 26, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (Black) and age (58) when, on July 26, 2021, she
was deemed ineligible for the position of a Licensed Professional Mental Health Counselor (GS-
11), announced under vacancy number JB-11151056-21-NW.

The record indicated that the Agency developed its Qualification Standard for the Licensed
Professional Mental Health Counselor position on April 3, 2018, which specifically includes a
basic requirement of a master’s or doctoral degree from a program that is accredited by
CACREP. However, a “Grandfather Provision” stipulated that those employed as Licensed
Professional Mental Health Counselors on the effective date of the qualification standard of
April 3, 2018, were considered to have met the qualification requirements. ROI at 131-2.

Complainant was eliminated from consideration for the Licensed Professional Mental Health
Counselor position due to this newer qualification standard because at the time she earned her
degree, the HBCU she attended had not yet attained the CACREP qualification, even though it
had since done so. She claimed to have previously been deemed qualified in a 2016 selection
process for a similar position prior to the 2018 change in the standard. She did not meet the
Grandfather Provision because she was not yet in the Licensed Professional Mental Health
Counselor position, but applying for it. Complainant alleged that most of those who met the
Grandfather Provision were Caucasian and most of those who did not meet it and were barred
from attaining the job by it were Black.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.

On October 7, 2022, Complainant filed a Motion to Amend to include a disparate impact theory
to her complaint. The Agency opposed the motion.

The Agency subsequently filed a Motion for Summary Judgment. Complainant submitted her
opposition and argued that there were too many credibility issues for a summary judgment
decision. Over Complainant’s objections, the AJ granted the Agency’s motion and issued a
decision without a hearing on November 30, 2022. As an initial matter, the AJ denied
Complainant’s Motion to Amend asserting it would delay the processing of the instant
complaint.

The AJ then found that the Agency determined that Complainant was not qualified for the
position because she lacked a master’s degree earned from a program that was accredited by the
CACREP. The AJ determined that Complainant’s responses and speculation were insufficient to
establish pretext. The AJ found Complainant could not show that her qualifications were superior
to those of the Selectee, who had attended the same university as Complainant. While
Complainant asserted that the Selectee was not fully licensed and had only worked at the Agency
for two years, she provided no supporting evidence.
                                                3                                     2023001451

Rather, the Selectee’s resume showed that she was a licensed professional counselor, and she
received her master’s degree at a time after the program obtained CACREP accreditation.

The AJ noted that Complainant generally argued that it was unfair that her school did not have
CACREP accreditation at the time she graduated, and that she should have been subjected to the
Grandfather Provision to waive the CACREP accreditation requirement, but she offered no
meaningful evidence to establish pretext for discrimination. The AJ concluded that there were no
genuine issues of material fact or issues of credibility to warrant a hearing.

The Agency issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that
she was subjected to discrimination as alleged.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant filed the instant appeal, and she submitted a brief on February 8, 2023, and an
addendum on February 14, 2023, in support of her appeal. In her brief, Complainant specifically
delineated how she had raised disparate impact to the agency during its investigation when she
stated that the agency’s eligibility standard was “negatively affecting loyal Black, older
employees, from promotional opportunities.” She argued that the issue of older applicants not
qualifying based on the timing of when they went to school because of accreditation policies the
Agency recently came up with certainly raises a claim that older workers are negatively affected.
Accordingly, she asserts, it was error for the Agency to omit the claim. The Agency opposed
Complainant’s appeal, stressing that for the AJ to have allowed Complainant to raise her
disparate impact argument at the hearing stage would have severely delayed the case.
Complainant filed another statement on June 22, 2023, and the Agency filed a Motion to Strike
her brief, asserting that she did not seek leave from the Commission to file additional pleadings.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions,
and the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that
a “decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other
words, we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and the Agency’s,
factual conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment
discrimination statute was violated. See id. at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo
standard of review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions
                                                4                                     2023001451

of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

                                           ANALYSIS

While Complainant opposes the AJ’s decision to deny her Motion to Amend on appeal, this is
not material because she did not need to file a Motion to Amend since she had previously raised
a disparate impact theory with the Agency. In both her formal complaint and EEO affidavit, she
stated that the Agency was “illegally supporting Indirect, Structural Discrimination and
Institutional racism,” noting that a policy, procedure, or rule applies to everyone but has the
effect of disadvantaging people with a certain protected characteristic. ROI at 5, 56.

Complainant also claimed that the Grandfather Provision was chosen for the Licensed
Professional Mental Health Counselor position because the majority of those who occupied it
were non-Black, unlike those in the Addiction Therapist positions who are primarily older
minorities, and that most of the Licensed Professional Mental Health Counselors who were
grandfathered were non-Black. Complainant added that there was a lack of promotion
opportunities and lateral movement for Addiction Therapists, as compared to the Licensed
Professional Mental Health Counselors. ROI at 6-7, 58.

The record confirms Complainant clearly raised her allegation of a disparate impact with the
Agency early in the processing of her EEO complaint. We find that the Agency should have
properly identified that Complainant raised a separate legal theory of disparate impact, in
addition to disparate treatment, and obtained the necessary evidence during the investigation.

To establish a prima facie case of disparate impact, a complainant must show that an agency
practice or policy, while neutral on its face, disproportionately impacted members of the
protected class. This is demonstrated through the presentation of statistical evidence that
establishes a statistical disparity that is linked to the challenged practice or policy. Watson v.
Fort Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U.S. 977, 994 (1988) (complainant must present “statistical
evidence of a kind and degree sufficient to show that the practice in question has caused the
exclusion.”). Specifically, a complainant must: (1) identify the specific practice or practices
challenged; (2) show statistical disparities; and (3) show that the disparity is linked to the
challenged practice or policy. Id. The burden is on a complainant to show that “the facially
neutral standard in question affects those individuals [within the protected group] in a
significantly discriminatory pattern.” Dothard v. Rawlinson, 433 U.S. 321, 329 (1977); see also
Complainant v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03990119 (Aug. 31, 2000).

If Complainant establishes a prima facie case of disparate impact, the burden shifts to the agency
to establish that the employment practice that causes the disparate impact on the protected class
is “job related for the position in question and consistent with business necessity.” 42 U.S.C. §
2000e-2(k)(1)(A)(i); see also Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431 (1971).
                                                5                                     2023001451

To show the practice at issue is related to the job, the agency must typically establish that the
practice correlates with ability to do a specific job or to successful performance of the job. See,
e.g., Id. at 436 (job-related requirement measures the person for the job); Caviale v. Wisconsin
Dep’t of Health & Soc. Servs., 744 F.2d 1289, 1294 (7th Cir. 1984) (policy limiting
consideration of candidates to those who were in career executive program was not job related).
To establish that a policy is consistent with business necessity, the agency must demonstrate that
its policy significantly serves its business interests. See Anderson v. Zubieta, 180 F.3d 329, 80
FEP 765 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (no evidence that policy was necessary to retain employees who
received enhanced benefits); Bradley v. Pizzaco of Neb., Inc., 7 F.3d 795, 797 (8th Cir. 1993)
(defense requires employer to prove a “compelling need” for the challenged policy).

If the Agency satisfies its burden, Complainant may nevertheless prevail if she identifies an
alternative employment practice that would accomplish the same goal with a less adverse impact
on those in her protected classes. See Justin P., et al. v. Dep’t of Transportation, EEOC Appeal
No. 0120080426 (Aug. 11, 2020); Emelda F. v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal Nos.
0120121347 and 0120121348 (Jun. 19, 2018); see also Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557, 578
(2009) (citing 42 U.S.C. § § 2000e-2(k)(1)(A)(ii) and (C)).

Complainant noted that she graduated from one of the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) in 1993, and it was not CACREP accredited until 2000. ROI at 6.
Complainant averred that there is a disparate impact because the Agency’s policies and standards
negatively affected at least forty older Black employees from promotional opportunities. 2
However, since the disparate impact claim was not properly framed and investigated by the
Agency, Complainant was not afforded the opportunity to establish a prima facie case of
disparate impact, and the record contains no evidence regarding the Agency’s response to her
allegation.

We find that the Agency erred in failing to properly accept and investigate Complainant’s
disparate impact claim. Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final order and REMAND the
complaint to the agency for a supplemental investigation. To avoid bifurcation of the complaint,
we are remanding the entire complaint back to the Agency for further processing. Upon its
completion of the supplemental investigation, the Agency shall issue Complainant the
appropriate rights for her disparate impact and disparate treatment claims.

                                         CONCLUSION

Therefore, after a careful review of the record, including Complainant’s arguments on appeal, the
Agency’s response, and arguments and evidence not specifically discussed in this decision, the
Commission VACATES the Agency’s final action and REMANDS the matter to the Agency in
accordance with this decision and the Order below.


2
 To the extent that Complainant also alleges a class complaint, she is advised to inform the
Agency of this as soon as possible to assist in future processing, in accordance with 29 C.F.R. §
1614.204.
                                                6                                    2023001451

                       ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD (B0224)

Within 90 (ninety) days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a
supplemental investigation to develop an adequate factual record regarding Complainant’s
disparate impact theory concerning her claim based on age and race. The Agency shall obtain all
pertinent evidence needed to address this claim, including but not limited to, sworn affidavits
from responsible management officials and other documentary evidence regarding:

       1. The April 3, 2018 Qualification Standards for the Licensed Professional Mental
          Health Counselor position, including the business reasons for the Agency’s CACREP
          accreditation requirement and the Grandfather Provision. The responsible
          management official(s) shall explain how the CACREP accreditation requirement
          correlates with the ability to perform the duties of a Licensed Professional Mental
          Health Counselor, and how this policy significantly serves its business interests. They
          shall also clearly explain the rationale for the Grandfather Provision, which carves out
          an exception to the CAPREP accreditation requirement, and how this policy
          significantly serves the Agency’s business interests.

       2. Evidence demonstrating the impact of the April 3, 2018 education standard on
          candidates for those positions, specifically statistics concerning: (1) candidates, by
          race and age, meeting the educational requirement of a Licensed Professional Mental
          Health Counselor position; (2) candidates, by race and age, who did not meet the
          educational requirement, but were subjected to the Grandfather Provision; and (3)
          candidates, by race and age, who were deemed not eligible for a Licensed
          Professional Mental Health Counselor position due to a lack of a degree with
          CACREP accreditation and not subject to the Grandfather Provision, including the
          candidates’ age and race data and noting those who were selected for positions. The
          Agency shall provide this information for each Licensed Professional Mental Health
          Counselor vacancy announcement since April 3, 2018.

       3. After obtaining 1 and 2 above, provide this information to Complainant and allow her
          an opportunity to submit statistical analyses on the collected data, and evidence of an
          alternative employment practice that could accomplish the same goal with a less
          adverse impact on those in her protected classes.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant with a copy of
the supplemental record and findings and shall notify Complainant of the appropriate rights for
her allegations of disparate impact and disparate treatment. If the Complainant requests a final
decision without a hearing, the Agency shall issue a final decision within thirty (30) days of
receipt of Complainant’s request, including appeal rights.

As provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision,” the
Agency must send to the Compliance Officer: 1) a copy of the Agency’s letter of
acknowledgment to Complainant, 2) a copy of the Agency’s notice that transmits the
                                                7                                     2023001451

investigative file and notice of rights, and 3) either a copy of the complainant’s request for a
hearing, or a copy of the final agency decision if Complainant does not request a hearing.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                                               8                                    2023001451

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                                 9                                     2023001451

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 21, 2024
Date
