             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                         Wanita Z., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                        Louis DeJoy,
                                    Postmaster General,
                                 United States Postal Service
                                 (Field Areas and Regions),
                                          Agency.

                                  Appeal No. 2024000149

                                Agency No. 1F-441-0326-22

                                         DECISION

On September 20, 2023, Complainant filed an appeal, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from
the Agency’s August 22, 2023 final decision concerning an equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint claiming employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.

                                      BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Mail Handler Equipment
Operator, M-05, in Springdale, Ohio.

On September 30, 2022, Complainant filed a formal complaint. Complainant claimed that the
Agency discriminated against her based on her race (African-American), sex (female), age
(DOB: June 2, 1965), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1. On September 20, 2022, and other dates, a supervisor would not allow Complainant
          to ride the Powered Industrial Transport (PIT) of her choice.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                              2                                      2024000149

       2. Since December 8, 2022 and continuing, management did not let Complainant
          perform the duties of her Mail Handler Group Leader position.

       3. On or around December 10, 2022, Complainant was sent home and not permitted to
          work eight hours.

       4. On February 23, 2022, Complainant became aware that management forged her
          signature on a document stating that she declined medical help. 2

Complainant also alleged retaliatory harassment for her EEO activity) when:

       5. On or about March 31, 2023, management returned a supervisor to work at
          Complainant’s work location, whom Complainant had previously accused of
          harassment.

After an investigation into the complaint, Complainant was provided with a copy of the report of
the investigation and with a notice of the right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge or a final decision within thirty days of receipt of the correspondence.

On June 22, 2023, Complainant requested a final agency decision. Thereafter, the Agency
issued the instant final decision, finding no discrimination or unlawful retaliation after an
analysis in the context of disparate treatment and harassment.

The instant appeal followed.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For a complainant to prevail, he
or she must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited
consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S.
at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the
agency to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas
Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has
met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
prohibited reason. See St. Mary’s Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).




2
  The Agency made a typographical error in identifying this claim in the final decision,
indicating that management “formed” Complainant’s signature, instead of “forging” it.
                                                3                                     2024000149

The established order of analysis in discrimination cases, in which the first step normally
consists of determining the existence of a prima facie case, need not be followed in all cases.
Where, as here, the agency has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the
personnel action at issue, the factual inquiry can proceed directly to the third step of the
McDonnell Douglas analysis, the ultimate issue of whether complainant has shown by a
preponderance of the evidence that the agency’s actions were motivated by discrimination. See
U.S. Postal Service Board of Governors v. Aikens, 460 U.S. 711, 713-714 (1983); Hernandez v.
Department of Transportation, EEOC Request 05900159 (June 28, 1990); Peterson v.
Department of Health and Human Services, EEOC Request No. 05900467 (June 28, 1990);
Washington v. Department of the Navy, EEOC Petition No. 03900056 (May 31 1990).

Regarding claim 1, Complainant stated that the Lead Manager, Distribution Operations (Black
male, age 50), stopped her on September 20, 2022, while she was driving a forklift and told her
to get a pallet lift. Complainant noted that the Lead Manager gave the same instructions through
the Supervisor, Distribution Operations (male, age 56) (“Supervisor 1”), to her during the week
of September 26, 2022. 3 Complainant stated that that in her 22 years with the Agency she had
never before been told what PIT to drive, and that employees chose their own PIT based on a
first-come, first-served basis.

The Lead Manager stated that Complainant is not necessary entitled to her choice of PIT
equipment and there was no special treatment relating to employees selecting PIT equipment.
He explained that assignments to specific equipment are based on the needs of the service on any
particular day. Supervisor 1 stated that instructing an employee to change from a forklift to a
pallet jack so the employee could efficiently and perform their job was a common supervisory
directive. Supervisor 1 stated that he does not recall Complainant inquiring with anyone in
management as to why she was not allowed to select the PIT equipment of her choice.

Regarding claim 2, Complainant alleged that since December 8, 2022, management did not let
Complainant perform the duties of her Mail Handler Group Leader position. Another Supervisor.
Distribution Operations, (African American/Indian, female, age not identified) (“Supervisor 2”),
who was also Complainant’s supervisor, stated that she was not aware of anyone not permitting
Complainant to perform her duties. The Supervisor stated that she walked around docks and
examined all activities and that Complainant was permitted to perform all her Group Leader
duties.

According to an Acting Supervisor (African American male, age 40), who also supervised
Complainant, Complainant performed the Mail Handler Group Leader duties that were needed
and/or as instructed by him.

Regarding claim 3, Complainant alleged that on or around December 10, 2022, she was sent
home and not permitted to work eight hours. The Acting Supervisor explained he was the
management official who sent Complainant home on December 10, 2022.


3
    Both officials averred they were not aware of Complainant’s prior EEO activity.
                                               4                                       2024000149

Specifically, he stated that Complainant was scheduled to work on December 11, 2022.
However, she reported to work on December 10, 2022, without being scheduled. Therefore, he
sent her home. Contrary to Complainant’s assertions, there had been no discussion with
Complainant about her reporting to work on December 10.

Regarding claim 4, Complainant alleged that on February 23, 2022, she became aware that
management forged her signature on a document stating that she declined medical help. The
Supervisor, Distribution Operations race (White female, age 45) (“Supervisor 3”) explained that
Complainant declined medical attention after sustaining an on-the-job injury on August 9, 2021.
She asserted that Complainant signed a declination letter and was provided a copy of that letter.

In addition, Supervisor 3 explained if an employee would like to seek medical attention
following an on-the-job injury the employee is sent to the hospital while remaining on the clock.
Supervisor 3 stated that she was not aware of Complainant informing anyone in management that
her signature had been forged on the document. There is no evidence of record reflecting that
any Agency official forged any documents, as Complainant has asserted.

Regarding claim 5, Complainant alleged that on or about March 31, 2023, management returned
a supervisor to her work location who Complainant had previously accused of harassment. This
supervisor explained that prior to March 2023, she was working at the Cincinnati P&DC and that
she was returned back to Springdale on a detail assignment as an Attendance Control Supervisor.
She stated that she was not Complainant’s supervisor during this detail and had no contact with
Complainant.

Here, the responsible management officials have articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory
reasons for the events at issue. Complainant failed to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that these proffered reasons were a pretext designed to mask discriminatory motivations based on
her race, sex, age, and or prior protected activity.

Harassment/Hostile Work Environment

Complainant has also alleged that management created a discriminatory hostile work
environment through the incidents already discussed. To prove her harassment claim,
Complainant must establish that she was subjected to conduct that was either so severe or so
pervasive that a “reasonable” person in Complainant’s position would have found the conduct to
be hostile or abusive. Complainant must also prove that the conduct was taken because of her
protected bases – in this case, her race, sex, age and prior protected activity. Only if Complainant
establishes both of these elements – hostility and motive – will the question of Agency liability
present itself. Here, as we have already concluded the evidence does not support a finding that
any of the disputed incidents were motivated in any way by Complainant’s race, sex, age or prior
EEO activity. Complainant’s claim of harassment is precluded based on our findings that she
failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by her protected
bases. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).
                                              5                                     2024000149

                                        CONCLUSION

We AFFIRM the Agency’s decision because of the preponderance of the evidence of record does
not establish that discrimination or unlawful retaliation occurred as alleged.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0920)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit his or her request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of his or her request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit his or her request and arguments to the Director, Office
of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed
to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files his or her request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request.
                                              6                                       2024000149

Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(c).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0610)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official title. Failure to do
so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you
file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                       Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 10, 2024
Date
