             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                           Jamey M., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                    Alejandro N. Mayorkas,
                                           Secretary,
                               Department of Homeland Security
                            (Transportation Security Administration),
                                            Agency.

                                    Request No. 2023003972

                                    Appeal No. 2022001484

                                 Hearing No. 430-2018-00087X

                               Agency No. HS-TSA-00724-2014

                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in Jamey M. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No.
2022001484 (June 8, 2023). EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its
discretion, grant a request to reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision
will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

                                        BACKGROUND

During the relevant period, Complainant worked as a Senior Federal Air Marshal (FAM), SV-
1801-I-00, for the Federal Air Marshal Service at the Agency’s Field Office in Charlotte, North
Carolina.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2023003972

On March 21, 2014, Complainant filed an equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging that the Agency discriminated against him based on race (Caucasian), sex (male),
disability (learning disability), age (born in 1967), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity when, on January 3, 2014, and continuing, Complainant learned that he was being paid a
lower salary than his coworkers, who were performing the same duties as him.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing and also moved for class
certification of his complaint. After the AJ denied Complainant’s request for class certification,
the Commission vacated the AJ’s decision and remanded the complaint to allow for
precertification discovery and/or further clarification on Complainant’s class claims. See Devon
H. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120152087 (Jan. 26, 2017), request for
recons. denied, EEOC Request No. 0520170354 (Aug. 10, 2017). However, Complainant
subsequently withdrew his requests for a hearing and for class certification. The AJ therefore
issued an order dismissing the hearing request and class complaint and directed the Agency to
issue a final decision on the merits of Complainant’s individual complaint.

The Agency issued a final decision finding no discrimination. Complainant appealed the
Agency’s final decision to the Commission. In Devon H. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC
Appeal No. 2020004286 (Oct. 6, 2021), we vacated the Agency’s final decision and remanded
the matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation regarding one of the comparative
employees (FAM1) Complainant had named as receiving higher pay than Complainant. We
ordered the Agency to obtain “[a]ny relevant evidence concerning [FAM1]’s professional
experiences, qualifications, and salary history prior to joining the Agency” and “[a]ffidavits from
all management and/or human resources official(s) involved in setting the initial salaries of
Complainant and [FAM1].” The Agency issued a new final decision on January 6, 2022, based
on the evidence in both the original and supplemental reports of investigation. The Agency
again found no discrimination, and Complainant appealed the new final Agency decision to the
Commission. On appeal, we affirmed the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.
Complainant then filed the instant request for reconsideration.

In our prior decision affirming the Agency’s January 6, 2022 final order, we found that
Complainant had established a prima facie case under the Equal Pay Act (EPA) of 1963, as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d) et seq. We also assumed that Complainant established a prima
facie case of disparate treatment under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as
amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. Complainant
named three comparative employees who were earning more pay than he did for the same job—
FAM1, FAM2, and FAM3. FAM1 and FAM3 were female and were the only comparative
employees considered for the EPA analysis. FAM2 was male and was considered, along with
FAM1 and FAM2, as part of the disparate treatment analysis.
                                               3                                    2023003972

With regard to the EPA, our prior decision found that the difference in pay between the female
comparatives (FAM1 and FAM3) and Complainant was based on a factor other than sex.
Complainant and all three comparatives were originally hired as FAMs by the Department of
Transportation’s Federal Aviation Authority (FAA), but they were soon transferred to the
Agency (Department of Homeland Security) upon its creation in November 2002. At the time of
their transfer to the Agency, the Agency maintained their FAM salaries as established by the
FAA. The FAA had determined the FAM initial salaries based on the new employees’ prior
federal salaries. Prior to becoming a FAM with the FAA in June 2002, Complainant made
$38,758 as a Detention Enforcement Officer with the Department of Justice, where he had
worked before becoming a FAM. FAM3 came directly to FAA from the Department of the
Treasury (U.S. Secret Service), where she had made $50,737. 2 FAM1 had worked for the U.S.
Immigration and Naturalization Service with a salary of $67,031 until she left to work at a state
agency for less than a year before becoming a FAM with the FAA. As a result of their respective
prior federal salaries, Complainant’s starting salary as a FAM was lower than the female
comparatives (as well as FAM2). Complainant and the comparatives all received subsequent
promotions and in-position increases that were proportional to their starting salaries.

Analyzing the EPA claim, our prior decision concluded that the Agency had proven its
affirmative defense under the EPA because any pay disparity between Complainant and the
female comparatives was the result of their beginning employment at the FAA at different rates
of pay based on their prior federal salaries, which is a factor other than sex. We further noted
that there was no argument made that Complainant’s or the comparatives’ prior salaries before
joining the FAA or the Agency was the result of discrimination.

Analyzing Complainant’s claim under a disparate treatment framework, we found that the
Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the pay disparity between
Complainant and the three comparatives, namely that it arose from initial salary disparities when
they entered the Federal Air Marshal Service with the FAA in 2002, which were based on each
employee’s varied federal experience prior to becoming FAMs. As such, the “built-in”
disparities continued through their subsequent years of employment. We therefore found that
Complainant failed to establish that the explanation provided by the Agency was pretext for
discriminatory or retaliatory animus.

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As an initial matter, we note that Complainant’s request for reconsideration disputes only the
prior decision’s conclusions regarding Complainant’s allegations under the EPA and specifically
its analysis of FAM1. The Commission exercises its discretion to address only those issues
specifically raised in Complainant’s request, and therefore we decline to address our prior
decision’s conclusions regarding FAM2 and FAM3, as well as its analysis under Title VII, the



2
  FAM2 also came directly to FAA from another federal agency, where he had a salary of
$52,963.
                                                4                                     2023003972

Rehabilitation Act, and the ADEA. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110) at Chap. 9, § IV.A (Aug. 5, 2015).

In his request for reconsideration, Complainant argues that our prior decision was clearly
erroneous when it concluded that Complainant’s salary prior to joining the Agency was
significantly lower than FAM1’s salary. Complainant argues that the record shows FAM1’s
salary immediately before her employment with FAA was $26,332, as a Probation/Parole Officer
with the Department of Corrections for the State of North Carolina. This indicates, Complainant
argues, that FAM1 in fact had a lower salary than Complainant prior to her employment as a
FAM. We find, however, that our prior decision was not clearly erroneous in this regard. The
analysis on appeal involved the comparatives’ prior federal salaries. Therefore, FAM1’s most
recent federal salary prior to her appointment as a FAM was in fact higher than Complainant’s
most recent federal salary, even if her non-federal salary immediately preceding her appointment
as a FAM was lower.

Relatedly, Complainant also argues (as he did on appeal) that under the Human Resource Policy
Manual for the FAA, Complainant, FAM2, and FAM3 would have been considered “transferring
employees” when they moved from their prior federal agencies to the FAA and were therefore
entitled to pay retention. On the other hand, according to Complainant, FAM1, with the short
break in her federal service prior to joining the FAA, was not entitled to retain her prior federal
pay. Complainant therefore argues that our prior decision was clearly erroneous because the
Agency would have violated its own policy if it considered FAM1’s prior federal salary in
determining her initial FAM salary. We note, however, that the excerpted portion of the Human
Resource Policy Manual Complainant attached to his brief is not included in either the original
report of investigation or in the supplemental investigation, and there is no evidence indicating
that it dictated FAA policy during the relevant time. Moreover, the excerpted portion of the
manual merely provides a definition of “Transfer” and does not appear to address issues of pay
retention. The manual is therefore insufficient to establish that our prior decision was clearly
erroneous.

Complainant also argues that the “Agency has been found to have committed pay discrimination
with regard to the setting of salary amount during the 2002 hiring of its employees” in Gabriele
G. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141757 (May 13, 2016). However, that
case involved Transportation Security Officers and is therefore not relevant to the instant matter
involving the Federal Marshal Service. Complainant also cites Isidro A. v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0720170026 (Feb. 6, 2018), as another example of the Agency’s history
of pay discrimination, but again, that case did not involve FAMs and is therefore irrelevant.

Lastly, Complainant argues that our prior decision was clearly erroneous because other cases
have found that “prior salary alone is not enough evidence to justi[fy] a pay disparity” (citing
Faust v. Hilton Hotels Corp., No. 88-CV-2640, 1990 WL 120615, at *5 (E.D. La. Aug. 13,
1990); Glenn v. Gen. Motors Corp., 841 F.2d 1567, 1571 (11th Cir. 1988)). We note, however,
that Complainant failed to make this argument on appeal and raises it for the first time on
reconsideration.
                                               5                                    2023003972

The Commission has held that arguments raised for the first time on request for reconsideration
will not be considered. Complainant v. Fed. Deposit Ins. Corp., EEOC Request No. 05970012
(May 21, 1998). Therefore, we decline to consider this new argument here.

We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. EEO
MD-110, at 9-18; see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20,
2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

                                        CONCLUSION

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2022001484 remains the
Commission’s decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

    COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION-EQUAL PAY ACT (Y0408)

You are authorized under section 16(b) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (29 U.S.C. § 216(b)) to
file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction within two years or, if the violation is
willful, three years of the date of the alleged violation of the Equal Pay Act regardless of
whether you have pursued any administrative complaint processing. The filing of the civil action
will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                                6                                    2023003972

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                        Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 19, 2023
Date
