             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013



                                          Joan V, 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                   Denis R. McDonough,
                                         Secretary,
                               Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                          Agency.

                                  Request No. 2023003300

                                   Appeal No. 2022002963

                            Agency No. 20DR-0005-2021103259


                   DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2022002963 (April 20, 2023).

                                    ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether Complainant’s request for reconsideration of EEOC Appeal No. 2022002963 meets the
criteria detailed in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

                                      BACKGROUND

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a Management Analyst at the Agency’s
Central Office in Washington, D.C.

Complainant filed a formal complaint, claiming hostile workplace discrimination based on race,
sex and in reprisal for prior protected activity.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                    2023003300

Complainant raised the following allegations:

   1. On March 25, 2021, Complainant reported to the Supervisory Management Analyst that
      she was receiving sexually explicit text messages from an unknown source, and the
      Supervisory Management Analyst did not issue Complainant a new government cell
      phone until May 20, 2021.

   2. On April 6, 2021, during Complainant’s mid-year review:

      a. The Supervisory Management Analyst informed Complainant that she was
         being removed from her position along with her analytical duties and was
         being reassigned to the Office of Information Security and would have
         responsibility for administrative duties.

      b. The Supervisory Management Analyst placed comments in Complainant’s
         mid-year evaluation, which suggested she was at “fault for the cause of
         workplace relationship issues.”

      c. The Supervisory Management Analyst asked Complainant psychological-
         social questions that were not related to her evaluation review and/or work
         assignments.

   3. On May 10, 2021, Complainant learned that her new administrative duties far exceeded
      the administrative assignments of other staff members; and her work was closely
      scrutinized.

After an investigation, Complainant requested a final agency decision. Thereafter, the Agency
issued a decision finding no discrimination. Complainant appealed.

In EEOC Appeal No. 2022002963, the Commission reversed the Agency’s final decision
concerning claim 1 regarding sexually explicit text messages but affirmed the Agency’s finding
of no discrimination with respect to all remaining claims. We specifically found that the Agency
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the actions taken in claims 2a and 2c.
Regarding claim 2a, the Supervisory Management Analyst asserted that Complainant’s duties
were reorganized as part of a larger functional realignment, designed to optimize capabilities and
functions. As to claim 2c, the Supervisory Management Analyst asserted that he was directed by
his supervisor to make the midyear reviews more substantive and engaging. He said that he was
using those questions to accomplish that goal. Concerning claim 2b, Complainant alleged that
the Supervisory Management Analyst stated that Complainant was the cause of workplace
relationship issues. The Supervisory Management Analyst asserted that he did not make such a
statement. Assuming the statement was made, Complainant has not shown that it was connected
to her protected bases. With respect to claim 3, the Supervisory Management Analyst stated that
there was a functional realignment of Risk Management and denied that Complainant’s
analytical duties were removed.
                                                 3                                     2023003300


We concluded that concerning claims 2a, 2b, 2c, and 3, to the extent that Complainant was
alleging that she was subjected to a hostile work environment, such a finding is precluded based
on our finding that she failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency were
motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus. The instant request for reconsideration from
Complainant followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON REQUEST

Complainant offers little in the instant request other than asserting earlier arguments on appeal
that she has been a victim of discrimination and continuing reprisal as reflected in claims 2a, 2b
and 3. Complainant also provides an addendum asserting the same.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request to
reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where
the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact
on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

                                           ANALYSIS

We have reviewed the submissions by Complainant in support of the instant request for
reconsideration. However, we determine that there is no reason to disturb the Commission’s
prior decision. Complainant essentially reargues matters that were raised and considered below.
We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the Commission. Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap.
9 § VI.A (Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736
(Aug. 20, 2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the
appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have
a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not
done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2022002963 remains the
Commission's decision and we repeat its Order below. There is no further right of administrative
appeal on the decision of the Commission on this request.

                                             ORDER

To the extent it has not already done so, the Agency is ordered to take the following remedial
action:
                                          4                                      2023003300


I.     Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
       shall conduct and complete a supplemental investigation on the issue of
       Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages and will afford her an
       opportunity to establish a causal relationship between the Agency’s
       discriminatory action and his pecuniary or non-pecuniary losses, if any. The
       Agency shall give Complainant notice of her right to submit objective evidence
       (pursuant to the guidance given in Carle v. Dep’t. of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No.
       01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993)) in support of her claim for compensatory damages.
       Complainant shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the date the Complainant
       receives the Agency’s notice to submit her compensatory damages evidence. The
       Agency shall issue a final decision, with appeal rights to the Commission, on the
       issue of compensatory damages. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110. The Agency shall submit
       a copy of the final decision to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth
       herein. Within sixty (60) calendar days of determining the amount of
       compensatory damages due Complainant, the Agency shall pay that amount to
       Complainant.

II.    Within ninety (90) days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency is
       directed to conduct four (4) hours of in-person or interactive training for
       Supervisory Management Analyst, Supervisory IT Specialist, OIT Supervisor,
       Director, the ISSO, and the staff of the IT Service desk for the Operation
       Supervisor’s position. The Agency shall address responsibilities with respect to
       eliminating discrimination and harassment in the workplace and training in EEOC
       regulations concerning appropriate responses to reports of harassment in the
       workplace. The Agency shall submit to the Compliance Officer appropriate
       documentation evidencing completion of such training. The Agency may contact
       the Commission’s Training and Outreach Division for assistance in obtaining the
       necessary training.

III.   The Agency shall consider disciplining Supervisory Management Analyst,
       Supervisory IT Specialist, OIT Supervisor, Director, and the ISSO. The
       Commission does not consider training to constitute disciplinary action. The
       Agency shall report its decision to the Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides
       not to issue any disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision.
       The Agency shall have one-hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date that
       this decision is issued to report whether it proposed discipline for any of the
       aforementioned individuals, as well as its reason for doing, or declining to do, so.
       If any of the named management officials is no longer employed by the Agency,
       the Agency shall furnish proof of the date(s) of separation.
                                                5                                     2023003300

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision." The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Further, the report must include supporting documentation, including evidence that the corrective
action has been implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Waterloo Post Office facility copies of the attached notice.
Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be
posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the
date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous
places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted. The Agency
shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any
other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as
directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision," within 10
calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format, and
must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.
                                                6                                     2023003300

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0124)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full
name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                         Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 27, 2024
Date
