             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                        Sharolyn S., 1
                                        Complainant,

                                              v.

                                        Louis DeJoy,
                                    Postmaster General,
                                 United States Postal Service
                                 (Field Areas and Regions),
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2023001439

                                 Agency No. 1C-531-0131-22


                                         DECISION

On January 8, 2023, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 6, 2022 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint
alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the complaint for further
action.

                                    ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented are whether the Agency properly dismissed Complainant’s allegation of a
failure to accommodate from April 2020 through November 9, 2021, and adequately investigated
Complainant’s claims to conclude that she did not establish discrimination as alleged.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2023001439

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail Processing
Clerk at the Agency’s Atlanta Processing and Distribution Center in Atlanta, Georgia.

Complainant stated that she had previously filed an EEO complaint in September 2018, which
remained pending before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) at the time of her affidavit for the
instant EEO complaint. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 97. She explained that she suffers
from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression as a result of an incident where she
was sexually harassed by a co-worker (the subject of her prior complaint), and that she also
suffers from back, foot, and knee issues so she is unable to stand or walk for extended periods of
time, cannot climb or descend stairs, and has restrictions on bending, stooping, and lifting. See
ROI at 97-98. She also stated that due to the PTSD she suffers as a result of the co-worker’s
sexual assault, her doctor stated that she can no longer work in the same facility as the co-worker
who assaulted her. See ROI at 98-99.

Complainant explained that the sexual harassment/assault occurred in September 2019 after
which she went on Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA) leave. See ROI at 100. She stated
that she was released to return to work at a different facility from her harasser in April 2020, but
when she arrived at work, her harasser was still there. See ROI at 100. She further alleged that
in June 2020, she suffered a knee injury in the workplace, and she submitted documents to the
Agency pertaining to her knee injury in July 2020, but received no response. See ROI at 100.
She stated that the Agency’s Reasonable Accommodation Committee requested additional
documentation which she had already provided and that they ignored her limitation resulting
from her PTSD that required she be moved to a different facility from her harasser, instead
focusing only on her physical restrictions due to her knee injury. See ROI at 100. She stated
that in July 2021, she was finally given a modified assignment to a different location that
accommodated her physical restrictions. 2 See ROI at 100.

She went out on COVID leave on August 16, 2021, and then was later hospitalized for sepsis so
she was ultimately not cleared to return to work until September 21, 2021. However,
Complainant stated that she has not been returned to work because the Agency has refused to
accommodate her restrictions, and she has only been told by management that there was no work
available for her based on her restrictions. 3 See ROI at 100-105.




2
  There is no explanation or documentation in the record of Complainant’s new position or why
it took the Agency a full year to move Complainant to a different work facility than her harasser.
3
  We emphasize that there is no statement from any Agency official confirming that any effort
was made to accommodate Complainant’s restrictions from September 2021 onwards or that
such an effort was unsuccessful.
                                                3                                    2023001439

Complainant further alleged that she should not have been placed on leave without pay (LWOP)
since November 21, 2021, because she was not able to work due to the Agency’s failure to
accommodate her restrictions. In January 2022, she was denied a bid position, and the position
was instead given to someone who had less seniority, while Complainant was marked
“ineligible” with no explanation. 4 See ROI at 105; 108-9.

EEO Complaint

On May 13, 2022, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated
against her on the bases of race (African-American/Native American/Cuban), sex (female), color
(Brown), disability (physical and mental), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
when:

       1.      Since November 10, 2021, she was not accommodated per her medical
               restrictions.
       2.      Since November 10, 2021, to present, she was charged LWOP.
       3.      On January 24, 2022, she was denied a bid position. 5


4
  The Supervisor of Distribution Operations stated in her affidavit that Complainant’s bid was
denied because she did not receive any updated medical documentation stating Complainant
could fully perform her duties within 6 months. See ROI at 152. There is no evidence in the
record indicating that Complainant was actually requested to provide such documentation or told
she needed to do so as Complainant stated she was given no explanation for the denial. In
addition, we note that the Collective Bargaining Agreement specifically states that in such a
situation “management may, at the time of the submission of the bid or at any time thereafter,
request that the employee provide medical certification indicating that the employee will be able
to fully perform the duties of the bid for position within six months of the bid.” See ROI at 337.
5
  Complainant’s complaint also included three additional claims, specifically that between April
2020 and November 9, 2021, she was not accommodated per her medical restrictions; that on
unspecified dates, her leave was not properly coded as workers’ compensation (OWCP) leave;
and on unspecified dates, she was denied insurance benefits. Complainant had filed a motion to
amend a pre-existing complaint to include her denial of reasonable accommodation claim for the
period from April 2020 onwards but the AJ assigned to her other case denied the motion, finding
that the denial of accommodation claim was not sufficiently like or related to her existing claim
and noted that the time limits on EEO counseling be tolled from November 11, 2021, the date
she filed the motion to amend. See ROI at 17-20. The Agency dismissed the denial of
reasonable accommodation claim for the dates prior to November 10, 2021, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. §1614.107(a)(1) because of untimely counselor contact. See ROI at 62-63. The Agency
also dismissed the claims regarding her leave not being properly coded and the denial of
insurance benefits as collateral attacks on the workers’ compensation adjudicatory process. See
ROI at 63-65. We find that the Agency’s affirmance of the claims regarding Complainant’s
leave not being properly coded as OWCP leave and the denial of insurance benefits were
                                               4                                    2023001439

On December 6, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
The Agency found that Complainant did not submit required medical documentation to support
her request for a reasonable accommodation or to show that she could perform the positions of
her bid position within six months. The Agency also determined that Complainant did not
demonstrate pretext for discrimination. The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

The instant appeal followed.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant appealed, arguing first that the Agency never provided her with a copy of the report
of investigation and that this is part of the Agency’s pattern of denying her information.
Complainant asserts that she repeatedly requested the report of investigation since October 2022,
and she was subsequently served the final decision without receiving the report of investigation.
Complainant appeals the final decision due to the denial of her due process for this complaint.

The Agency did not file a brief in response.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                            ANALYSIS

Report of Investigation

As an initial matter, we will address Complainant’s statement that she was never provided with a
copy of the report of investigation. Complainant also included copies of emails which she sent
to the investigator requesting updates and a copy of the investigation in response to an email
from the investigator informing her that the investigation had been completed and she should
expect to receive a copy of the investigation.




properly dismissed as collateral attacks.
                                                5                                    2023001439

The Agency has not provided any evidence to indicate that it did, in fact, provide Complainant
with a copy of the report of investigation or provided Complainant with the opportunity to
request a hearing from an administrative judge as she is entitled to under 29 C.F.R. §1614.108(f).
Because Complainant was never provided with a copy of the report of investigation or provided
the opportunity to request a hearing, we find that the Agency’s final decision must be vacated.
The Commission has previously vacated an agency’s final action and remanded the complaint
for a hearing when the record contained insufficient evidence of a complainant’s receipt of the
report of investigation. See Emerson P. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2021001011
(Aug. 2, 2022); Susan D. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2020000586 (Feb. 9, 2021).

We further find that the Agency’s decision cannot stand because upon our review of the record,
which is inadequate and does not include sufficient information to permit a factfinder to make a
finding as to whether or not the Agency complied with the requirements of the Rehabilitation
Act, discussed further below.

Dismissal of Denial of Reasonable Accommodation Claims Prior to November 10, 2021

In so doing, we must also address the Agency’s dismissal of Complainant’s claim that she was
denied an accommodation for her restrictions from April 2020 and ongoing through November
10, 2021. We find that the Agency improperly framed the claim of a denial of reasonable
accommodation as discrete, untimely events. However, Commission has stated that because an
employer has an ongoing obligation to provide a reasonable accommodation, failure to provide
such an accommodation constitutes a violation each time the employee needs it. See Palomo v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120103596 (January 5, 2011); see also EEOC Compliance
Manual Section 2: Threshold Issues, No. 915.003, at 2-IV (May 12, 2000, revised in part, July
21, 2005). We, therefore, REVERSE the Agency’s dismissal of Complainant’s continuing denial
of reasonable accommodation claim starting in April 2020 and REMAND for the Agency to
properly investigate the claim.

Inadequacy of the Investigation

In so doing, we emphasize that remand for a supplemental investigation is also necessary
because we find that the record is starkly deficient in much of the necessary information as to
Complainant’s reasonable accommodation claims even for the accepted claim after November
10, 2021. For example, there is no evidence in the record to indicate that the Agency took any
action to search for a position which would fit Complainant’s restrictions after November 2021,
nor is there any actual statement by an Agency official confirming Complainant’s assertion that
she was told there were no available positions for her. Beyond that, the record is notably lacking
in any information as to what occurred at the meeting between Complainant and the Reasonable
Accommodation Committee to discuss her requested accommodations.
                                                6                                    2023001439

In addition, what evidence there is in the record is contradictory and there is no explanation for
any of the contradictions. As an example, although the record contains a letter sent to
Complainant on June 11, 2021, requesting additional medical documentation and noting that the
only information provided was dated August 3, 2020, that is not supported by the record as it
also contains a Medical Evaluation of Work Status Form filled out by Complainant’s physician
dated May 20, 2021, which details Complainant’s physical restrictions. See ROI at 127; 266.
Furthermore, while the record contains a memo stating that Complainant’s accommodation
request was being closed as of August 24, 2021, due to the lack of updated medical information,
Complainant’s lack of responsiveness is contradicted by other evidence in the record. See ROI
at 265-66. The record contains a copy of another Medical Evaluation of Work Status Form filled
out by Complainant’s doctor dated November 9, 2021, as well as notes from Complainant’s
psychologist on her mental conditions most recently dated May 3, 2022. See ROI at 120; 126.
There is, however, no evidence in the record that the Agency took any action in response to this
updated medical information.

Finally, as already noted, Complainant alleges that she was never provided with the report of the
investigation and therefore was never given the opportunity to request a hearing, which she is
legally entitled to.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the
matter for a supplemental investigation as ordered below.

                        ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD (B0224)

Within ninety (90) days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a
supplemental investigation, to include the following actions:

   1. Conduct and complete a supplemental investigation consistent with the requirements of
      29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b), in EEO MD-110, Chapter 6 and consistent with this decision.
      The supplemental investigation shall include, but is not limited to:

           a. An additional sworn affidavit, and any supporting documentation, from
              Complainant to include greater details as to the full history of the Agency’s
              alleged failure to accommodate her medical restrictions since April 2020.
           b. An additional sworn affidavit and any supporting documentation from all the
              people who attended the Reasonable Accommodation Committee meeting with
              Complainant which specifically requires them to give the requested information
              as to what occurred during the meeting.
           c. Any documentation concerning whether the Agency conducted a search for
              positions which Complainant would be able to perform within her medical
              restrictions.
                                               7                                    2023001439

           d. Sworn statements from any Agency officials involved in Complainant’s
              reasonable accommodation requests including sworn statements that address if or
              whether the Agency actually searched for any positions which would
              accommodate Complainant’s medical restrictions.

   2. In addition, the supplemental investigation should also address Complainant’s claim that
      she was denied a bid position which was given to someone with less seniority to provide
      additional information as to why and whether Complainant’s bid was rejected without
      any explanation or opportunity for her to provide the necessary information about her
      medical ability to perform the full duties of the position.

   3. The Agency shall also offer Complainant an opportunity to submit a rebuttal to the
      additional affidavits obtained during the supplemental investigation.

Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant with a copy of
the original report of investigation, as well as the supplemental record and findings and shall
notify Complainant of the appropriate rights, including the right to request a hearing before an
EEOC Administrative Judge. If the Complainant requests a final decision without a hearing, the
Agency shall issue a final decision within thirty (30) days of receipt of Complainant’s request,
including appeal rights.

As provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision,” the
Agency must send to the Compliance Officer: 1) a copy of the Agency’s letter of
acknowledgment to Complainant, 2) a copy of the Agency’s notice that transmits the
investigative file and notice of rights, and 3) either a copy of the complainant’s request for a
hearing, or a copy of the final agency decision (“FAD”) if Complainant does not request a
hearing.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall give priority to this
remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained in this Order. The Office of
Federal Operations will issue sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not
making reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a complaint.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
                                                8                                     2023001439

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                               RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507.
                                                 9                                     2023001439

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed
timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing
period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).


               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                                 10                                     2023001439

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 11, 2024
Date
