             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Sharon M., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                       William J. Burns,
                                            Director,
                                  Central Intelligence Agency,
                                            Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2023003175

                                Hearing No. 570-2022-00547X

                                       Agency No. 21-43

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s April 6, 2023 final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s
final decision and REMANDS the complaint for further processing.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the record was sufficient to support the Agency’s finding that
Complainant did not establish discrimination or harassment based on her sex, or in reprisal for
prior EEO activity.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by the Agency.
In September 2020, Complainant was assigned a manager (“Manager”) as her second-line


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                   2023003175

supervisor. Complainant stated that on October 24, 2020, the Manager informed her that the
Agency attempted to punish him for too many sexual encounters with foreign women, but that he
was “a hero” because he was successful and ultimately won his counter complaint. Complainant
noted that there was a witness (“Witness 1”) to this conversation who stated that he was sorry
that Complainant had to listen to the Manager’s comments. Complainant reported this
conversation to another management official (“Witness 2”). Report of Investigation (ROI) at
124-5, 127.

Complainant averred that the Manager seemed infatuated with one of Complainant’s
subordinates (“Subordinate”), and he repeatedly asked about her sex life and what she wore.
Complainant also recalled a meeting in December 2020, when the Manager belittled the
Subordinate and singled her out by questioning her in a demeaning manner. ROI at 128-9, 145.

Complainant alleged that Agency officials repeatedly undermined her authority and held her to
higher standards, as compared to her male colleagues. For example, the Manager instructed
Complainant to stop reporting issues related to concerns that an employee was committing time
fraud. Complainant stated that a Senior Human Resources Officer discounted Complainant’s
authority by not taking appropriate action when another officer that was under Complainant’s
command was threatened. Complainant asserted that the Manager held her to a different standard
from her male counterparts because she had to outperform them, while keeping silent on
deficiencies. ROI at 131-2, 139.

Complainant stated that in early May 2021, she went to see an Agency Medical Provider who
called her “hormonal.” Complainant complained to the Manager about the inadequate heath care,
and the Manager allegedly responded that Complainant was “overly emotional.” ROI at 149-51.

Complainant alleged that she was falsely accused of violating the alcohol policy. On or about
May 14, 2021, a Chief of Operations (“Chief”) issued Complainant a Letter of Reprimand for
Violation of [Redacted Location] Alcohol Policy. Management officials were notified that
Complainant violated the policy twice, on December 3, 2020, and May 5, 2021. Witnesses
reported that Complainant was noticeably intoxicated, and she repeatedly stated that others were
“fucked.” On the second occasion, Complainant stated that she would “burn this mother fucker”
down, and witnesses described Complainant’s behavior as incoherent and aggressive. ROI at
147, 248-9. Complainant was subsequently sent home short-of-tour (SOT) on May 13, 2021.
ROI at 151.

Complainant declared that after she was issued the Letter of Reprimand, she was unable to
access her shared drive to obtain evidence for her EEO complaint. ROI at 157.

On August 25, 2021, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination and harassment (sexual harassment and sex-based harassment)
based on sex (female), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity, when:
                                                 3                                     2023003175

       1.      from September 2020 to May 2021, the Agency assigned the Manager as
               Complainant’s manager, despite his history of documented improper relationships
               with women;
       2.      from September 2020 to May 2021, the Manager belittled a female officer (the
               Subordinate) in the presence of male colleagues, but he would not belittle male
               officers in the presence of their colleagues;
       3.      from September 2020 to May 2021, a Senior Human Resources Officer, the
               Chief, and Complainant’s Deputy discounted and undermined Complainant’s
               authority relating to her subordinates;
       4.      from September 2020 to May 2021, the Manager, the Chief, and the Senior
               Human Resources Officer held Complainant to different and higher standards
               than her male colleagues;
       5.      from October 2020 to May 2021, the Manager shared stories with Complainant
               that were sexual in nature; made derogatory and graphic sexual comments
               regarding women; and repeatedly questioned Complainant about the sexual
               history of female officers;
       6.      on May 5, 2021, the Manager and Complainant’s first-line supervisor
               (“Supervisor”) falsely accused Complainant of violating the alcohol policy and
               did not allow Complainant the opportunity to provide an explanation;
       7.      on May 6, 2021, Complainant was told that she was being “hormonal” by an
               Agency Medical Provider who failed to investigate her symptoms;
       8.      in early May 2021, the Manager told Complainant that she was “overly
               emotional” during a conversation in which Complainant notified him of
               inadequate healthcare concerning potential events and the inability of the Health
               Unit to respond to them;
       9.      on May 13, 2021, Complainant was sent home SOT from her Permanent Change
               of Station assignment;
       10.     on May 14, 2021, Complainant was issued a Letter of Reprimand containing false
               information regarding her consumption of alcohol; and
       11.     on May 18, 2021, Complainant was denied access to her computer account to
               obtain evidence for her EEO complaint.

At the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant was provided a copy of the investigative file
and requested a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant initially
requested a hearing, but subsequently withdrew her request. The Agency issued a final decision
finding that Complainant did not establish discrimination or harassment as alleged.

The Agency found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of sex discrimination
for claims 9 and 10 because she did not show that a similarly situated employee outside of her
protected classes was treated differently, or that a prohibited consideration was a factor for these
adverse actions. Management officials testified that there were no other officers who engaged in
similar behavior. In addition, the management officials were not aware of Complainant’s prior
EEO activity, and Complainant did not show a nexus between her EEO activity and the
complained of actions.
                                               4                                    2023003175


Even if Complainant could establish a prima facie case of sex discrimination and retaliation, the
Agency found that the actions were based on Complainant’s violation of the alcohol policy and
unprofessional conduct. The Agency then found that Complainant did not establish pretext for
discrimination or retaliation. While Complainant argued that the Manager was often drinking but
not similarly disciplined, her assertions were not supported by preponderant evidence. Further,
the responsible management official believed that the SOT and reprimand were appropriate
because Complainant denied the accusations and did not accept responsibility for her actions,
despite the consistent testimony from witnesses about her conduct.

The Agency also determined that Complainant did not establish her claims of unlawful
harassment. For incidents 1-4, and 6-11, she provided no evidence that the alleged conduct
involved her protected classes or were motivated by her sex or retaliation. For event 7, the
Medical Provider testified that he did not even see Complainant on May 6, 2021, or within two
weeks of that date.

Regarding the allegation that she was subjected to sexual comments from the Manager (claim 5),
the record showed that Complainant did not raise any concerns or complaints about his alleged
inappropriate language until May 14, 2021. In addition, the Agency found that none of the
incidents were hostile or abusive in nature, nor would they reasonably deter Complainant or
others from making or supporting a charge of discrimination. The Agency concluded that
Complainant did not establish discrimination or harassment as alleged.

The instant appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant argues that the Commission should reverse the Agency’s final decision.
Complainant asserts that she established pretext for discrimination for claims 9 and 10 because
the Agency was not uniform in how it issued discipline. She also contends that she experienced a
barrage of sex-based and sexual comments and innuendos from the Manager. Complainant
contends that the Agency is liable for the hostile work environment because she reported the
Manager’s behavior to the Supervisor, who failed to take action and the Supervisor responded
that the Manager was well-liked and good with young officers.

The Agency opposes Complainant’s appeal and argues that Complainant cannot establish
discrimination on any basis. While Complainant contends that she established pretext for the
Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for sending her home SOT and issuing a
reprimand because the Manager was not treated in the same manner for drinking, the Agency
asserts that she did not meet her burden to show that the reasons were pretextual.

Regarding Complainant’s harassment claims, the Agency assumes Complainant’s membership in
a protected category and that the Agency would be subject to vicarious liability for the
harassment by a direct supervisor. However, it asserts that Complainant cannot show that the
                                                5                                    2023003175

conduct was unwelcome, that it was based on her sex, or that it was motivated by Complainant’s
sex or prior EEO activity. The Agency requests that the Commission deny Complainant’s appeal.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of
review “requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                          ANALYSIS

Decision without a Hearing

While Complainant withdrew her hearing request, we find that a hearing is necessary due to the
specific evidence presented in this case regarding Complainant’s allegations of a hostile work
environment based on the Manager’s alleged comments of a sexual nature and reprisal. The
Commission has noted that when a party submits an affidavit and credibility is at issue, “there is
a need for strident cross-examination.” Pedersen v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Request No.
05940339 (February 24, 1995).

In order to establish a prima facie case of sexual harassment, a complainant must prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, the existence of five elements: (1) that they are a member of a
statutorily protected class; (2) that they were subjected to unwelcome conduct related to their
sex; (3) that the harassment complained of was based on their sex; (4) that the harassment had
the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with their work performance and/or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5) that there is a basis for imputing
liability to the employer. Celine B. v. Dep’t of Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001960 (Sept. 21,
2020).

In this case, it is undisputed that Complainant is female. There is a genuine dispute regarding
whether Complainant was subjected to unwelcome conduct in the form of comments of a sexual
nature. The Manager averred, “[n]o, I have never shared stories with Complainant that were
sexual in nature or made derogatory and graphic sexual comments regarding women.” ROI at
265. However, the record contains statements from Complainant and witnesses to challenge the
Manager’s credibility regarding his denial. Complainant averred that the Manager discussed
“riding women” and not marrying them in December 2020; he stated that he never married the
mother of his child because he preferred to “ride his women like his cars – hard and fast, and
change them frequently”; he bragged about using his government quarters as a “harem”; and he
                                               6                                    2023003175

touted being close friends with another officer who was forced to retire because he was in charge
of a location that was alleged to have engaged in misconduct. ROI at 144.

Complainant stated that Witness 1 was present during a conversation with the Manager when he
made inappropriate comments, and Witness 1 later told Complainant that the comments were
difficult to listen to and uncomfortable. Complainant also reported this conversation to Witness
2. ROI at 145. However, Witness 1 was not asked if he recalled this specific event. Rather, he
was only asked if he witnessed the Manager sharing stories that were sexual, derogatory, and
graphic in nature, and he replied that he did not recall witnessing that. ROI at 359. Witness 2
stated that Complainant “never indicated that she believed she was being harassed/discriminated
against or in a hostile work environment.” ROI at 369. We find that a hearing is necessary to
further question Witness 1 and Witness 2 about the specific conversation that Complainant
raised, and to assess their credibility.

Another witness (“Witness 3”) corroborated Complainant’s account of the Manager’s comments
about women at a dinner. Witness 3 averred that the Manager stated, “[d]ating is like car
shopping. You have to give a lot of them a test drive before you pick one.” Witness 3 also
described the Manager as “fairly lecherous,” and she confirmed that he was fixated on the
Subordinate, to the point where Witness 3 and another manager brainstormed ideas to prevent
the Subordinate from being alone with the Manager. Witness 3 stated that the Manager had a
well-known reputation as a womanizer and misogynist, and he was an example of a senior
officer continuing to rise through the ranks without facing consequences for his actions. ROI at
392-3. As such, further testimony is needed at a hearing, especially in regard to the Manager’s
assertion that he never shared stories with Complainant that were sexual in nature.

We also find that a hearing is needed to explore Complainant’s assertions that she was subjected
to a “barrage” of sex-based comments and sexual innuendos from the Manager. Complainant
Appeal Brief at 16. While she provided some specific dates and alleged comments, she offers
general testimony without explaining the frequency of the comments. For example, that the
Manager bragged about sleeping with numerous foreign women; he turned every conversation
into a sexual reference or improper comment about the Subordinate; and he commented that
officers like the Subordinate come to misbehave and have sexual relations with other officers.
ROI at 128-30.

The record suggests that Complainant learned of some of the stories about the Manager through
gossip, and not from the Manager himself. For example, Complainant stated that two employees
told her about the Manager’s discussions of his friend’s pornography studio. ROI at 144. Witness
3 testified that she and Complainant would often chat about the Manager’s alleged misogynistic
behavior, including the pornography shoot. ROI at 392. The Subordinate also stated that
Complainant referenced stories she had heard about the Manager in the past, regarding
inappropriate relationships and comments toward women. ROI at 380.

The Agency contends that Complainant did not establish that the alleged comments were
unwelcome. Complainant’s Deputy testified that when Complainant informed him of the
                                                 7                                      2023003175

Manager’s sexual comments, he repeatedly asked if they concerned her, and she responded that
they did not. ROI at 348-9. We find that the nature and frequency of the Manager’s alleged
sexual comments to Complainant, in addition to whether Complainant welcomed gossip about
the Manager, are material facts that warrant a hearing.

There is also a need to obtain additional evidence regarding the Agency’s liability, if any, for the
alleged sexual harassment. While the Agency conceded vicarious liability due to the fact that the
Manager was in Complainant’s direct supervisory chain, the Agency can raise an affirmative
defense. Where the harassment does not result in a tangible employment action the agency can
raise an affirmative defense, which is subject to proof by a preponderance of the evidence, by
demonstrating: (1) that it exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any
harassing behavior; and (2) that complainant unreasonably failed to take advantage of any
preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the agency or to avoid harm otherwise. See
Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998); Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524
U.S. 775 (1998). See also Enforcement Guidance: Vicarious Liability for Unlawful Harassment
by Supervisors, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (June 18, 1999). This defense is not available when
the harassment results in a tangible employment action (e.g., a discharge, demotion, or
undesirable reassignment) being taken against the employee. In the case of co-worker
harassment, an agency is responsible for acts of harassment in the workplace where the agency
(or its agents) knew or should have known of the conduct, unless it can show that it took
immediate and appropriate corrective action. Id.

While Complainant was issued a reprimand and had her tour cut short, these actions were not
related to the alleged sexual harassment and were based on her actions related to the violation of
the alcohol policy and her subsequent refusal to take accountability for her actions. As such, the
Agency may be able to raise an affirmative defense for the sexual harassment claim.

Complainant contended that she complained of the Manager’s conduct to the Supervisor, who
responded that the Manager was well-liked and “good with the young officers.” ROI at 129.
However, the Supervisor testified that she did not recall Complainant informing her of the
Manager’s stories that were sexual, derogatory, or graphic in nature, or that he questioned
Complainant about the sexual history of female officers. ROI at 281. As such, we find that there
is a genuine dispute regarding whether the Agency exercised reasonable care to prevent and
correct promptly any harassing behavior or if Complainant unreasonably failed to take advantage
of any preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the Agency or to avoid harm.

In addition, we find that there is a need for further examination of Complainant’s reprisal claim.
The Commission has a policy of considering reprisal claims with a broad view of coverage.
Under Commission policy, claimed retaliatory actions which can be challenged are not restricted
to those which affect a term or condition of employment. Rather, a complainant is protected from
any discrimination that is reasonably likely to deter protected activity. See Carroll v. Dep’t of the
Army, EEOC Request No. 05970939 (April 4, 2000). To ultimately prevail in her claim of
retaliatory harassment, Complainant must show that she was subjected to conduct sufficient to
dissuade a “reasonable person” from making or supporting a charge of discrimination. See
                                                8                                    2023003175

Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006); EEOC
Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related Issues, EEOC Notice No. 915.004, § II(B)(3)
& n. 137 (Aug. 25, 2016). Only if both elements are present, retaliatory motivation and a chilling
effect on protected EEO activity, will the question of Agency liability for reprisal-based
harassment present itself. See Janeen S. v. Dep’t of Commerce, EEOC Appeal No. 0120160024
(Dec. 20, 2017).

Complainant averred that in December 2020, she reported operational issues to the Manager,
who allegedly responded that if Complainant continued to complain, she would “document
[herself] out of a job.” Complainant asserted that the comments had a severe chilling effect when
the Manager threatened her to “shut up.” Complainant further testified that any time she had
anything negative to report, the Manager responded with a sigh and stated that if she continued
to complain, she would be out of a job. ROI at 129, 131. The Manager again only offered a
general denial that Complainant did not make him aware of any concerns under his supervision.
ROI at 262. It is not clear if Complainant raised an opposition to discrimination or harassment
during these conversations with the Manager, and he was not asked to address the specific
allegation that he stated that Complainant would “document” herself out of a job if she
complained. As such, we find that a hearing is needed to obtain additional information and assess
credibility regarding Complainant’s allegation that she was subjected to reprisal.

In its final decision, the Agency determined that the evidence was at best equipoise, and it
concluded that Complainant had not met her burden to establish that the comments and actions
occurred as alleged. However, we find that Complainant’s claims were inadequately
investigated, which resulted in the equipoise evidence. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108(b) requires, inter alia, that an agency develop an impartial and appropriate factual
record upon which to make findings on the claims raised in the complaint. One purpose of an
investigation is to gather facts upon which a reasonable fact finder may draw conclusions as to
whether a violation of the discrimination statutes has occurred. Here, the EEO Investigator posed
general questions and accepted broad denials, without following up on vague responses. In
addition, witnesses were not asked about comments or events that Complainant or other
witnesses raised. A supplemental investigation would not gather sufficient evidence needed for
this specific complaint.

The hearing process is intended to be an extension of the investigative process, designed to
ensure that the parties have “a fair and reasonable opportunity to explain and supplement the
record and, in appropriate instances, to examine and cross-examine witnesses.” See EEO MD-
110, 7-1; see also 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(e). “Truncation of this process, while material facts are
still in dispute and the credibility of witnesses is still ripe for challenge, improperly deprives
Complainant of a full and fair investigation of her claims.” Bang v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Appeal No. 01961575 (March 26, 1998). See also Peavley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request
No. 05950628 (October 31, 1996); Chronister v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05940578
(April 25, 1995). In summary, there are simply too many unresolved issues which require an
assessment as to the credibility of the various management officials, coworkers, and
                                                9                                     2023003175

Complainant, herself. Therefore, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the
matter for a hearing.

To avoid bifurcation of the complaint, we are remanding the entire complaint back to the Agency
for further processing. Upon remand, the AJ assumes full responsibility for the adjudication of
the complaint and has the power to regulate the conduct and scope of the hearing as appropriate,
under the provisions of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109. See Complainant v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC
Request No. 0520130425 (Oct. 29, 2013). This includes consideration of a party’s motion for
summary judgment for other claims in this complaint.

                                         CONCLUSION

Therefore, after a careful review of the record, including Complainant’s arguments on appeal, the
Agency’s response, and arguments and evidence not specifically discussed in this decision, the
Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision and REMANDS the matter to the Agency
for further processing in accordance with this decision and the Order below.

                                             ORDER

Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency is directed to
submit a request for a hearing on Complainant’s behalf, the complaint file, and a copy of this
appellate decision to the Hearings Unit of the EEOC’s Washington D.C. Field Office. The
Agency shall provide written notification to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth
below that the complaint file has been transmitted to the Hearings Unit. Thereafter, the
Administrative Judge shall hold a hearing and issue a decision on the complaint in accordance
with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109 and the Agency shall issue a final action in accordance with 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
                                                10                                    2023003175

underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
                                                11                                     2023003175

unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



                                 __      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 22, 2024__
Date
