             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                         Winfred H., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                       Frank Kendall,
                                         Secretary,
                                 Department of the Air Force,
                                          Agency.

                                   Appeal No. 2024001513

                                  Agency No. 4U1L2305599

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC
or Commission) from the Agency's final decision dated November 27, 2023, dismissing his
complaint of unlawful employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the reasons set forth herein,
we VACATE the Agency’s dismissal and remand this matter for a supplemental investigation.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s final decision properly dismissed Complainant’s complaint for failure to
state a claim.

                                       BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as an Assistant Project Manager for Roberts
Treescaping LLC (RTS) and performed landscaping services at the Agency’s Joint Base
Charleston in South Carolina pursuant to a contract between RTS and the Agency. On October
30, 2023, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination based on race (African-American) and color (Black).




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                   2024001513

In its November 27, 2023 final decision, the Agency determined that Complainant’s complaint
was comprised of the following claims:

       1.     Whether [a named Agency Section Supervisor, Contracting Officer] subjected
              Complainant to harassment between September 2021-August 2023 when:

              a.    [The named Contracting Officer] has consistently bypassed Complainant as
                   project manager and went to the [named owner of the company] on matters,
                   instead of to Complainant.

              b.    She sent multiple emails to Complainant’s office workflow email with false
                   information that went to everyone on the management team.

              c. She changed inputs from the [named Contracting Representative] and
                 misrepresented what was said in emails that reflected negatively on
                 Complainant.

       2.     Whether Complainant was subjected to harassment by a [named Agency Contract
              Specialist] between July 2023-September 2023 when:

              a.   [The Agency Contract Specialist] verbally attacked, belittled, and referred to
                   Complainant during a meeting as a liar.

The Agency dismissed the formal complaint for failure to state a claim, reasoning that
Complainant works for a contractor not the Agency. The Agency further found that it did not
exercise sufficient control over Complainant’s position to be deemed a joint employer for EEO
purposes. Specifically, the Agency set forth that the contractor hired, paid, set hours and
provided benefits to Complainant.

The instant appeal followed.

                                CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant asserts that the Agency’s Contracting Officer subjected him and other
employees of color working under the RTS contract to a hostile work environment. He asserts
that the Agency’s Contracting Officer micromanaged the employees of color working under the
contract by following them and taping them. He asserts that the Contracting Officer has made
false statements and referred to the employees of color working under the RTS contract as “bad
and lazy.” In contrast, Complainant asserts that the Agency treated the owner of RTS, who is
Caucasian, respectfully. Complainant submits, on appeal, a signed letter from the President of
RTS pertaining to the events at issue.

In response, the Agency requests that we affirm its final decision dismissing Complainant’s
complaint.
                                              3                                   2024001513

The Agency reiterates that the Agency is not a joint employer in this matter. In addition, the
Agency submits signed documents from Complainant and an Agency official referencing some
of the factors to consider when determining if an entity should be deemed a joint employer for
EEO purposes.

                                 STANDARD OF REVIEW

The Agency’s decision to dismiss a complaint is subject to de novo review by the Commission,
which requires the Commission to examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker and issue its decision based on the Commission’s
own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). The
Commission should construe the complaint in the light most favorable to the complainant and
take the complaint’s allegations as true. See Cobb v. Department of the Treasury, EEOC
Request No. 05970077 (March 13, 1997). Thus, all reasonable inferences that may be drawn
from the complaint’s allegations must be made in favor of the complainant.

                                        ANALYSIS

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(a) provides that complaints of discrimination shall
be processed in accordance with Part 1614 of the EEOC regulations. EEOC Regulation 29
C.F.R. § 1614.103(c) provides that within the covered department, agencies, and units, Part
1614 applies to all employees and applicants for employment.

In Serita B. v, Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150846 (Nov. 10, 2016),
the Commission reaffirmed its longstanding position on “joint employers” and noted that it is
found in numerous sources. See, e.g., EEOC Compliance Manual Section 2, “Threshold
Issues,” Section 2-III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) (May 12, 2000) (Compliance Manual); EEOC
Enforcement Guidance: Application of EEO Laws to Contingent Workers Placed by
Temporary Employment Agencies and Other Staffing Firms (Dec. 3, 1997) (Enforcement
Guidance), “Coverage Issues,” Question 2; Ma v. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs.,
EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 & 01962390 (May 29, 1998). We reiterate the analysis set
forth in those decisions and guidance documents in this decision.

Agencies often conclude that an individual is not an employee based solely on the fact that
the individual performs work pursuant to a contract between the federal government and an
outside organization and the outside organization, not the federal government, controls the
pay and benefits of that individual. See, e.g., Helen G. v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120150262 (Feb. 11, 2016); Nicki B. v. Dep't of Educ., EEOC Appeal No.
0120151697 (Feb. 9, 2016). These elements are, however, just two of the factors relevant to
joint employment under the Commission's long-standing position and it is not at all surprising
that they would be present when an individual working under a federal contract for a federal
agency raises a complaint of discrimination.
                                              4                                   2024001513

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each exercise sufficient
control of an individual to qualify as the worker's employer. Compliance Manual,
Section 2- III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). To determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise
sufficient control, EEOC considers factors derived from common law principles of
agency. See Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2. EEOC considers,
inter alia, the Agency's right to control when, where, and how the worker performs the job;
the right to assign additional projects to the worker; whether the work is performed on Agency
premises; whether the Agency provides the tools, material, and equipment to perform the job;
the duration of the relationship between the Agency and the worker; whether the Agency
controls the worker's schedule; and whether the Agency can discharge the worker. EEOC
Compliance Manual, Section 2-III(A)(1) (citing Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503
U.S. 318, 323-24 (1992)); EEOC v. Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550 F.App'x 253, 256 (6th
Cir. 2013) (“Entities are joint employers if they ‘share or co-determine those matters
governing essential terms and conditions of employment”’) (quoting Carrier Corp. v. NLRB,
768 F.2d 778, 781 (6th Cir. 1985); see also Ma, EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 &
01962390.

The language of the contract between the agency and the staffing firm is not dispositive as
to whether a joint-employment situation exists. In determining a worker's status, EEOC
looks to what actually occurs in the workplace, even if it contradicts the language in the
contract between the staffing firm and the agency. Baker v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC
Appeal No. 01A45313 (Mar. 16, 2006) (while contract between staffing firm and
agency provided that contract personnel were employees of staffing firm under its
administrative supervision and control, agency actually retained supervisory authority over
the contract workers).

On the factor of the right to control when, where, and how the worker performs the job and
to assign additional projects, complete agency control is not required. Rather, the control
may be partial or joint and still point to joint employment. Shorter v. Dep't of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120131148 (June 11, 2013) (where both staffing firm and
agency made assignments, this pointed to joint employment); Complainant v. Dep't of
the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120143162 (May 20, 2015), request for reconsideration
denied, EEOC Request No. 0520150430 (Mar. 11, 2016) (where staffing firm wrote and
issued complainant's appraisal with input from agency, this pointed toward joint employment).
Likewise, where both the agency and staffing firm provided tools, material, and equipment
to perform the job, this pointed to joint employment. Elkin v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120122211(Nov. 8, 2012). Similarly, where a staffing firm terminates a
worker after an agency communicates it no longer wants the worker's services, this supports a
finding that the agency has joint or de facto power to discharge the worker. See, e.g.,
Complainants v . Dep't of Justice, EEOC Appeal Nos. 0120141963 & 0120141762
(Jan. 28, 2015); see also Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550 Fed. App'x at 254, 256 (where
defendant removed staffing firm's workers from job site without challenge from staffing
firm, and after such removals staffing firm generally fired worker, this pointed to joint
employment); Butler v. Drive Auto. Indus. of America, Inc., 793 F.3d 404, 414-15 (4th Cir.
                                                5                                     2024001513

2015). The EEOC considers an entity's right to control the terms and conditions of
employment, whether or not it exercises that right, as relevant to joint employer status.
Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2, Example 5 (where an entity
reserves the right to direct the means and manner of an individual's work, but does not
generally exercise that right, the entity may still be found to be a joint employer).

The record is not sufficiently developed to make a determination as to whether the Agency is
a joint employer for the purpose of using the 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 complaint process.
Complainant alleges that named Agency officials subjected him to a hostile work environment
based on race and color by micromanaging him, videotaping him, and creating false information
pertaining to his work etc. Complainant further asserts that the President of RTS tried to address
the allegations of discrimination with Agency officials but that Agency officials changed the
subject of the meeting.

We acknowledge that the Agency submitted, with its statement in opposition to Complainant’s
appeal, two brief documents by Complainant and an Agency official (not one of the Agency
officials named in the complaint) pertaining to some of the factors to consider when determining
whether an entity should be deemed a joint employer for EEO purposes. These two documents
indicate that the contractor had some control over Complainant’s position such as paying
Complainant’s wages and providing benefits. However, the record also reflects that the Agency
maintained some control over Complainant’s position. The work was done on the Agency’s
premises and that Complainant speaks to the Agency’s Contracting Representative often. While
the record reflects that the contractor provides various tools to perform the landscaping services,
Complainant, on appeal, also asserts that the Agency was supposed to provide maps pertaining
to the landscaping services, but failed to do so. Complainant, on appeal, indicated that the
Agency’s Contracting Officer had significant control pertaining to the contract and that the
Contracting Officer often stated “nothing happens to this contract without her permission,
direction, and approval.” Complainant asserts that Agency officials had significant control over
his position regarding monitoring his work by videotaping him and other employees of color
under the contract.

Complainant, on appeal, submits a letter from the President of RTS. This letter suggests that the
Agency had some control over monitoring employees under the contract, and providing
direction and feedback. The President set forth that the Agency directed Complainant to
perform work that was not funded. The President said that 20 employees under the contract quit
due to harassment from the Contracting Officer. In addition, the President asserted “[t]hrough
investigation and interviews it became increasingly concerning that the video surveillance
appeared to be limited to the crews of color (African descent), only one non-colored person
reported being followed and harassed.”

As set forth above, we have insufficient information in the record and are not able to ascertain
based on the record before us whether the Agency should be deemed a joint employer for EEO
purposes. While the record references a contract and a Performance Work Statement (PWS)
between the Agency and RTS, the record does not contain these documents.
                                                6                                    2024001513

While the Agency submits, on appeal, brief statements from Complainant and an Agency
official (not named in the complaint), the record does not contain any affidavits from
Complainant, the relevant Agency officials, and relevant RTS officials regarding the control the
Agency had over Complainant’s position.

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on the foregoing, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision dismissing Complainant’s
complaint and we REMAND this matter for a supplemental investigation in accordance with the
ORDER below.

                                             ORDER

Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency is ORDERED
to take the following actions:

       1.    Conduct a supplemental investigation to obtain evidence consistent with this decision
            and relevant in assessing whether the Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes.
            The Agency shall supplement the record with a copy of the contract and the
            Performance Work Statement between RTS and the Agency.

       2.    The evidentiary record shall also include affidavits from relevant Agency officials
            including the Contracting Officer and Contracting Representative named in
            Complainant’s formal complaint. These affidavits shall address, in detail, the control
            Agency officials had over Complainant’s position including, but not limited to, the
            areas of assigning duties, monitoring Complainant (such as through video
            surveillance) and providing direction and feedback pertaining to Complainant’s
            performance. The Agency shall obtain affidavits from any other officials that appear
            to have knowledge of these matters.

       3. The Agency shall obtain an affidavit from Complainant addressing, in detail, the
          control Agency officials had over his position including, but not limited to, the areas
          of assigning him duties, monitoring him (such as through video surveillance) and
          providing direction and feedback pertaining to his performance.

       4. The Agency shall obtain affidavits from relevant officials from RTS, such as the
          President of RTS, to the extent they cooperate. The affidavits shall address, in detail,
          the control Agency officials had over Complainant’s position including, but not
          limited to, the areas of assigning duties, monitoring Complainant (such as through
          video surveillance) and providing direction and feedback pertaining to Complainant’s
          performance.
                                                7                                     2024001513

       5. The Agency shall either issue a new final decision either dismissing the formal
          complaint, with an appropriate analysis of relevant facts with appeal rights to the
          Commission, or a letter accepting Complainant’s complaint for investigation.

       6. A copy of the supplemental investigation and the new dismissal letter or letter of
          acceptance shall be provided as set forth below in the section entitled
          “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”

             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action
on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 &
Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
                                                 8                                     2024001513

       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title.
                                                9                                    2024001513

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 29, 2024
Date
