             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Leota F., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                               v.

                                     Martin J. O’Malley,
                                        Commissioner,
                                Social Security Administration,
                                           Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2022004140

                                Agency No. CHI-21-0558-SSA

                                          DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s June 28, 2022 final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the
Agency’s final decision.

                                     ISSUE PRESENTED

The issue presented is whether the Agency correctly concluded that Complainant failed to
establish that she was subjected to discrimination on the bases of race (African-American), sex
(female), color (Black), age (63), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity as alleged.

                                       BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Claims Technical
Expert (CTE), GS-0105-12, at the Agency’s Great Lakes Program Service Center in Chicago,
Illinois.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                               2                                    2022004140

Complainant received a reprimand on July 20, 2021, for conduct unbecoming a federal
employee. The reprimand cited two specifications: on June 16, 2021, Complainant refused to
provide a status update on assigned cases, raised her voice, and continued to refuse during a
subsequent meeting; and on June 23, 2021, she refused assistance with a mainframe password
issue, leading to a two-hour work delay. Complainant’s first-line supervisor, Module Manager
(S1), asserted that requesting status updates and assisting with password issues were common
management practices.

Complainant also claimed workplace harassment, alleging that S1 assigned duties preventing her
from completing primary CTE tasks and treated her differently from other CTEs. She
complained of accusatory, condescending, and rude communication. Complainant alleged that
the reprimand itself constituted harassment, tarnishing her character, and that the issuance of a
3.0 Performance Assessment Communications Systems (PACS) rating for Fiscal Year 2021,
lower than a prior 4.5 PAC rating in Fiscal Year 2019, was harassment. Complainant reported
these concerns to the union and management. S1 denied the allegations explaining that work
assignments aligned with the week's plan and that management routinely assisted employees
with password issues. S1 denied claims of harassment in assigning duties and asserted that the
reprimand and rating were issued in line with standard practices.

On November 11, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her and subjected her to a hostile work environment on the bases of race
(African-American), sex (female), color (Black), age (63), and in reprisal for prior protected
EEO activity when:

       1.     On July 20, 2021, she received a reprimand; and
       2.     Beginning June 23, 2021 and present, with regard to work assignments,
              assignment of duties, condescending comments, spoken to in a loud voice,
              lowered PACS, reprimand, and questioning time to work on inquiries. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency determined that
Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged.




2
  The Agency dismissed an additional allegation as untimely raised with an EEO Counselor.
Complainant raised no challenges regarding this matter on appeal and the Commission can find
no basis to disturb the Agency’s dismissal decision. The Commission will, however, consider
the claim as background evidence in support of Complainant’s hostile work environment claim.
                                                3                                     2022004140

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant cited non-receipt of the report of investigation as a primary reason to
appeal, stating that she was denied the right to a hearing. Complainant expressed concerns about
the fairness and impartiality of the decision and disputed the productivity standards used in
evaluating her. Complainant claimed that she was unfairly compared to others and criticized for
not being more productive due to her years of service. Complainant asserted that the reprimand
was an attack on her character. Accordingly, Complainant requests that the Commission reverse
the final decision.

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                 ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As an initial matter, we note that Complainant asserts on appeal that she did not receive
notification of her right to a hearing. The record reveals that on March 30, 2022, the Agency
mailed, via the United Parcel Service (UPS), the report of investigation and notice of her right to
request a hearing to Complainant's address. The record contains UPS tracking information
showing that someone with the same last name as Complainant signed for the package
containing the report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing on April 2,
2022, at Complainant's residence. This is sufficient to show that the Agency fulfilled its
obligations to notify Complainant of her right to a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f).
Complainant did not request a hearing within the applicable time limit. The Agency's subsequent
issuance of a final decision was, therefore, proper.

Hostile Work Environment

To establish a hostile work environment claim, Complainant must show that: (1) she is a member
of a statutorily protected class; (2) she was subjected to harassment in the form of unwelcome
verbal or physical conduct involving the protected class; (3) the harassment complained of was
based on the statutorily protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term or condition of
employment and/or had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with the work
environment and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and (5)
                                                 4                                      2022004140

there is a basis for imputing liability to the employer. See Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d
897 (11th Cir. 1982).

In this case, we find that the totality of the alleged conduct was not sufficiently severe or
pervasive to establish a hostile work environment. Even assuming that the alleged conduct was
sufficiently severe or pervasive to create a hostile work environment, the Commission finds that
Complainant failed to show that the Agency's actions were based on discriminatory or retaliatory
animus. The record reflects that the alleged incidents were more likely the result of routine
supervision, personality conflicts, and general workplace disputes and tribulations. For example,
the reprimand was issued to Complainant for conduct unbecoming of a federal employee,
regarding two instances: the first involved her refusal to provide status on assigned cases and her
display of unprofessional behavior during a meeting on June 16, 2021, while the second involved
her refusal to allow assistance with a mainframe password issue on June 23, 2021, leading to a
delay in resolution and an inability to work for over two hours. With respect to her PACS rating,
S1 indicated that each year is independently assessed, and Complainant’s performance appraisal
was issued according to her performance during the appraisal year. S1 added that there is no
lowering or raising of ratings as each year stands on its own. S1 affirmed Complainant received a
successful rating in both Fiscal Year 2020 and 2021, which have been the only two appraisals
she has issued to her since she became her manager.

Further, Complainant alleged that S1 made a comment suggesting that Complainant should be
more productive based on her years of service and journeyman status. While Complainant may
have felt this was unprofessional and inappropriate, it does not explicitly target a protected class.
S1 denied making any derogatory comments. We note that the antidiscrimination statutes are not
civility codes. Rather, they forbid “only behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the
conditions of the victim's employment.” Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75,
81 (1998).

Finally, S1 denied that Complainant’s assignments were different than those of her peers. S1
stated that work assignments change from week to week, but the manner in which they are
assigned has not changed. S1 noted that Complainant’s duties were reduced to allow her to
focus on the highest priority assignments, but she was not given additional work or different
work than others. S1 added that Complainant was asked to provide status of cases and directed
to reach out to management when nearing completion of an assignment in order to be issued the
next assignment.

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment regarding her claims, as
discussed above, Complainant has not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the Agency's
explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination or reprisal. Accordingly, the
Commission finds that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile
work environment as alleged.
                                                5                                    2022004140

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the final decision of the Agency finding no
discrimination.

                          STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                             RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the
absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed
if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request
and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party,
unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                                6                                     2022004140

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within
ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a
request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                          RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 1, 2024
Date
