            U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Operations
                                 P.O. Box 77960
                            Washington, DC 20013


                                    Sheryl S, 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                              Merrick B. Garland,
                              Attorney General,
                            Department of Justice,
                       Executive Office of Immigration Review,
                                      Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2024003773

                         Agency No. EOI-2023-001168

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed a timely appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission) from the Agency's final decision dated May
22, 2024, dismissing a formal complaint of unlawful employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII),
as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For
the reasons set forth herein, we VACATE the Agency’s dismissal of
Complainant’s complaint and we REMAND this matter to the Agency for further
processing.

                               ISSUES PRESENTED

Whether the Agency’s final decision properly dismissed Complainant’s
complaint on procedural grounds.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                           2024003773

                                BACKGROUND

During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a Legal Management
Analyst at the Agency’s San Diego Immigration Court in San Diego, California
through a contract entered into between the Agency and CGI Federal
[hereinafter CGI]. On December 21, 2023, Complainant filed a formal
complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to discrimination on based
on race (Black), color (Brown), and disability.

In its final agency decision, the Agency determined that Complainant’s
complaint was comprised of the following claim:

      On September 2, 2022, [Complainant] was terminated from [her]
      contractor position with CGI as a Legal Management Analyst.

The Agency’s final decision dismissed Complainant’s complaint for untimely
EEO Counselor contact. The Agency reasoned that Complainant did not
initiate EEO contact until March 30, 2023, when she submitted an online
inquiry through the EEOC’s Public Portal, outside of the applicable time period.
The Agency further set forth that Complainant had constructive knowledge of
the applicable time limit because the record reflects that information regarding
the time limit was on display in the Agency’s break room. Final Agency
Decision (FAD) at 7.

The Agency’s final decision also dismissed the formal complaint on the
alternate grounds for failure to state a claim. The Agency reasoned that the
Agency did not exhibit sufficient control over Complainant’s employment to be
considered a joint employer. FAD at 7. The Agency further set forth that
“[Agency] management requested that [Complainant] be removed from the
Mail and General Support Services Contract serving the [Agency] on August
25, 2022. However, the decision to approve [the Agency’s] request was made
by CGI…employees. FAD at 6.

The instant appeal followed.

                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant requests that we reverse the Agency’s final decision.
Complainant states “[a named Agency employee] issued an email complaining
about my performance, was my direct supervisor, had control over work tools
one of which was refused as a reasonable accommodation request for a sit-
to-stand desk, and controlled the manner in which work was to be performed.”
                                      3                            2024003773

Complainant reiterates that her employment was terminated based on her
disabilities. Moreover, Complainant sets forth that she reached a settlement
with CGI, but that she can still pursue this matter with the Agency. 2

In response, the Agency requests that we affirm the Agency’s final decision
dismissing Complainant’s complaint. Regarding the Agency’s dismissal for
failure to state a claim, the Agency set forth that “[a named Agency Official]
confirmed that [Agency] management requested that [Complainant] be
removed from…servicing [the Agency] on August 25, 2022. However, this
decision to approve this specific request was made by CGI…employees.”
Agency Brief at 11.       Regarding the Agency’s dismissal for untimely EEO
Counselor contact, the Agency reiterates that Complainant had constructive
knowledge of the applicable time limit based upon EEO posters being displayed
at the Agency’s facility. Agency Brief at 13.

                            STANDARD OF REVIEW

The Agency’s decision to dismiss a complaint is subject to de novo review by
the Commission, which requires the Commission to examine the record
without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the previous decision
maker and issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of
the record and its interpretation of the law. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). The
Commission should construe the complaint in the light most favorable to the
complainant and take the complaint’s allegations as true. See Cobb v.
Department of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05970077 (March 13, 1997).
Thus, all reasonable inferences that may be drawn from the complaint’s
allegations must be made in favor of the complainant.

                                   ANALYSIS

Dismissal for Untimely EEO Counselor Contact

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1) requires that complaints of
discrimination should be brought to the attention of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Counselor within forty-five (45) days of the date of the matter
alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel action, within forty-
five (45) days of the effective date of the action.




2
 The record does not contain a copy of a settlement agreement between CGI
and Complainant.
                                     4                           2024003773

The Commission has adopted a "reasonable suspicion" standard (as opposed
to a "supportive facts" standard) to determine when the forty-five (45) day
limitation period is triggered. See Howard v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Request
No. 05970852 (Feb. 11, 1999). Thus, the time limitation is not triggered until
a complainant reasonably suspects discrimination, but before all the facts that
support a charge of discrimination have become apparent.

EEOC Regulations provide that the agency or the Commission shall extend the
time limits when the individual shows that he was not notified of the time
limits and was not otherwise aware of them, that he did not know and
reasonably should not have known that the discriminatory matter or personnel
action occurred, that despite due diligence he was prevented by circumstances
beyond his control from contacting the Counselor within the time limits, or for
other reasons considered sufficient by the agency or the Commission.

The Agency improperly dismissed Complainant’s complaint for untimely EEO
Counselor contact. The record reflects that Complainant contacted the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (rather than the Agency’s EEO Office)
on March 30, 2023. Complaint File at 122. 3 The record contains an email
dated September 6, 2023 to Complainant from an EEOC Investigator Support
Assistant. Therein, the EEOC staff member set forth that if Complainant was
seeking to file a complaint against a federal agency, she needed to initiate
EEO Counselor contact within 45 days from the alleged discriminatory
incident. The EEO Staff member also provided the contact information for an
Agency EEO Official. The record reflects that Complainant, on September 24,
2023, emailed the Agency EEO Official, whose information was provided by
the EEOC.

The Agency found that Complainant had constructive knowledge of the
applicable time limit because relevant information was posted in the Agency’s
lunchroom at the facility in which Complainant had worked. However, we
disagree. We acknowledge that the record contains an email from an Agency
Official that EEO information has been on display, since June 2020, in the
lunchroom at the facility in which Complainant worked. Complainant File at
321. In addition, the record contains various photos of EEO posters contained
within a glass box. Complaint File at 319-323. However, the text of the EEO
posters in the photos is illegible. Thus, we are unable to ascertain whether
these EEO posters properly set forth the applicable time limit, as well as the
proper Agency EEO Official to contact.

3
 Our citations to the Complaint File reference the page number of the pdf
document before us on appeal.
                                     5                         2024003773

Based on the foregoing, we do not find that the Agency established that
Complainant had constructive knowledge of the applicable time limit. See
August V. v. Dep’t of Transportation, EEOC Appeal No. 0120142165 (Jan. 6,
2020) (OFO reversing Agency’s dismissal for untimely EEO Counselor contact
reasoning that the photo of the EEO poster, submitted by the Agency, was
illegible and thus the Agency produced insufficient evidence that Complainant
had constructive knowledge of the time limit.) Moreover, we find that after
EEOC staff provided Complainant with information on the applicable time limit
and the proper Agency contact information on September 6, 2023, she
initiated contact with an Agency EEO Official on September 24, 2023 (within
45 days of September 6, 2023, when she was provided the relevant
information to initiate EEO contact).

Dismissal for Failure to State a Claim

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(a) provides that complaints of
discrimination shall be processed in accordance with Part 1614 of the
EEOC regulations. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(c) provides that
within the covered department, agencies, and units, Part 1614 applies to
all employees and applicants for employment.

In Serita B. v, Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150846
(Nov. 10, 2016), the Commission reaffirmed its longstanding position on
“joint employers” and noted that it is found in numerous sources. See,
e.g., EEOC Compliance Manual Section 2, “Threshold Issues,” Section 2-
III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b) (May 12, 2000) (Compliance Manual); EEOC
Enforcement Guidance: Application of EEO Laws to Contingent Workers
Placed by Temporary Employment Agencies and Other Staffing Firms
(Dec. 3, 1997) (Enforcement Guidance), “Coverage Issues,” Question 2;
Ma v. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389
& 01962390 (May 29, 1998). We reiterate the analysis set forth in those
decisions and guidance documents in this decision.

Agencies often conclude that an individual is not an employee based solely
on the fact that the individual performs work pursuant to a contract
between the federal government and an outside organization and the
outside organization, not the federal government, controls the pay and
benefits of that individual. See, e.g., Helen G. v. Dep't of the Army,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120150262 (Feb. 11, 2016); Nicki B. v. Dep't of
Educ., EEOC Appeal No. 0120151697 (Feb. 9, 2016).
                                     6                          2024003773

These elements are, however, just two of the factors relevant to joint
employment under the Commission's long-standing position and it is not at
all surprising that they would be present when an individual working under
a federal contract for a federal agency raises a complaint of discrimination.

The term “joint employer” refers to two or more employers that each
exercise sufficient control of an individual to qualify as the worker's
employer.     Compliance      Manual, Section   2- III(B)(1)(a)(iii)(b). To
determine whether the Agency has the right to exercise sufficient control,
EEOC considers factors derived from common law principles of
agency. See Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at Question 2.
EEOC considers, inter alia, the Agency's right to control when, where, and
how the worker performs the job; the right to assign additional projects to
the worker; whether the work is performed on Agency premises; whether
the Agency provides the tools, material, and equipment to perform the job;
the duration of the relationship between the Agency and the worker;
whether the Agency controls the worker's schedule; and whether the
Agency can discharge the worker. EEOC Compliance Manual, Section
2-III(A)(1) (citing Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318,
323-24 (1992)); EEOC v. Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550 F.App'x 253,
256 (6th Cir. 2013) (“Entities are joint employers if they ‘share or
co-determine those matters governing essential terms and conditions of
employment”’) (quoting Carrier Corp. v. NLRB, 768 F.2d 778, 781 (6th
Cir. 1985); see also Ma, EEOC Appeal Nos. 01962389 & 01962390.

The language of the contract between the agency and the staffing firm is
not dispositive as to whether a joint-employment situation exists. In
determining a worker's status, EEOC looks to what actually occurs in
the workplace, even if it contradicts the language in the contract between
the staffing firm and the agency. Baker v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC
Appeal No. 01A45313 (Mar. 16, 2006) (while contract between
staffing firm and agency provided that contract personnel were
employees of staffing firm under its administrative supervision and
control, agency actually retained supervisory authority over the contract
workers).

On the factor of the right to control when, where, and how the worker
performs the job and to assign additional projects, complete agency
control is not required.
                                     7                           2024003773

Rather, the control may be partial or joint and still point to joint
employment. Shorter v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal         No.
0120131148 (June 11, 2013) (where both staffing firm and agency
made assignments, this pointed to joint employment); Complainant v.
Dep't of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120143162 (May 20, 2015),
request for reconsideration denied, EEOC Request No. 0520150430 (Mar.
11, 2016) (where staffing firm wrote and issued complainant's appraisal
with input from agency, this pointed toward joint employment).

Likewise, where both the agency and staffing firm provided tools,
material, and equipment to perform the job, this pointed to joint
employment. Elkin v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal                       No.
0120122211(Nov. 8, 2012). Similarly, where a staffing firm terminates
a worker after an agency communicates it no longer wants the worker's
services, this supports a finding that the agency has joint or de facto
power to discharge the worker. See, e.g., Complainants v. Dep't of
Justice,   EEOC     Appeal    Nos. 0120141963 & 0120141762 (Jan. 28,
2015); see also Skanska USA Bldg., Inc., 550 Fed. App'x at 254, 256
(where defendant removed staffing firm's workers from job site without
challenge from staffing firm, and after such removals staffing firm
generally fired worker, this pointed to joint employment); Butler v. Drive
Auto. Indus. of America, Inc., 793 F.3d 404, 414-15 (4th Cir. 2015). The
EEOC considers an entity's right to control the terms and conditions
of employment, whether or not it exercises that right, as relevant to
joint employer status. Enforcement Guidance, “Coverage Issues,” at
Question 2, Example 5 (where an entity reserves the right to direct
the means and manner of an individual's work, but does not generally
exercise that right, the entity may still be found to be a joint employer).

The record is not sufficiently developed to make a determination as to
whether the Agency is a joint employer for the purpose of using the 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 complaint process. Complainant alleges she was denied
a reasonable accommodation and was subsequently terminated at the
direction of the Agency.         Thus, the circumstances surrounding
Complainant’s removal from the contract is significant to whether the
Agency is a joint employer for EEO purposes.

The record reflects that the Agency appears to have played some role in
Complainant’s termination. The record contains a copy of an email from the
Agency’s Contracting Officer Representative (COR) dated August 25, 2022, to
a CGI Official. Therein, the Agency COR sets forth:
                                     8                           2024003773

      Per our conversation, against direction by CGI, [Complainant
      continues to go to her Federal [points of contact] to discuss her
      problems…[Complainant] came into my office this morning stating
      that she is in pain from her back, hips, and knees. Because of this
      pain, she has not been able to sleep. She came in groggy and
      physically looks like she can hardly stand…The above is not to be
      shared with the contractor. At this point, we need to remove her
      from the contract. As discussed, please notify her of her removal
      after her shift today so that she doesn’t have a chance to make a
      scene at the office. 4 Complaint File at 36.

The record also contains an email from a CGI Human Resource Business
Partner dated September 1, 2022, to other CGI Officials setting forth “please
provide your [first and second] level approval on the termination of
[Complainant] effective [September 2, 2022] due to customer direct
removal.” Complaint File at 38. Two CGI officials responded to this email
approving the termination.

The record, however, does not contain any signed affidavits from relevant
Agency Management Officials and CGI Officials detailing the reasons for
Complainant’s removal, as well as the parties involved in the removal. 5 The
record also does not contain an affidavit from Complainant surrounding the
circumstances regarding her removal.




4
   The record contains a copy of the relevant contract pertaining to
Complainant’s employment at the Agency’s facility. The contract sets forth in
relevant part: “[t]he Government reserves the right to require the Contractor
to reassign from this contract any Contractor employee whose conduct is
unsuitable, such as to cause reckless endangerment or otherwise jeopardize
the safety of others in the workplace, or whose continued use of the contract
is deemed contrary to the best interests of the Government…” Complaint File
at 210.

5
  The record reflects that the EEO Counselor’s Report contains summaries of
interviews with Agency Officials. However, the record does not contain
affidavits for these individuals. Complaint File at 12-16. In addition, the EEO
Counselor’s Report does not reflect that the Agency’s EEO Office attempted to
obtain statements from relevant CGI officials.
                                     9                          2024003773

It is also unclear, based on the record before us, whether it has continued to
employ Complainant on other contracts. 6 Moreover, we are unable to
determine whether CGI conducted an independent investigation of complaints
related to Complainant’s performance/conduct prior to her termination.

                                CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s final decision dismissing Complainant’s
complaint and we REMAND this matter for a supplemental investigation in
accordance with the ORDER below.

                                   ORDER

Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the
Agency is ORDERED to take the following actions:

     1. Conduct a supplemental investigation to obtain evidence consistent
        with this decision and relevant in assessing whether the Agency is a
        joint employer for EEO purposes. The evidentiary record shall also
        include affidavits from relevant Agency officials, including, but not
        limited to, the Agency’s Contracting Officer Representative and the
        responsible management officials set forth by Complainant in her
        formal complaint and the EEO Counselor’s Report. The affidavits
        shall address the circumstances leading up to Complainant’s removal
        and whether they or another Agency official requested that CGI take
        any action regarding Complainant, prior to her termination. The
        Agency shall also obtain affidavits from other Agency officials that
        appear to have knowledge of the circumstances surrounding
        Complainant’s termination.

     2. The Agency shall obtain an affidavit from Complainant addressing
        the circumstances surrounding her termination and the factors as to
        whether the Agency exercised sufficient control over her position in
        order for it to be deemed a joint employer for EEO purposes.




6
 The record contains a signed statement by Complainant dated December 2,
2023, which seems to suggest that she is no longer working with CGI.
Complaint File at 68.
                                    10                            2024003773

     3. The Agency shall also obtain affidavits from relevant officials from
        CGI addressing, in detail, the circumstances surrounding
        Complainant’s termination and whether Agency officials requested
        that CGI take any action prior to Complainant’s termination. The
        affidavits shall also address if CGI conducted its own independent
        investigation    regarding   the   alleged    complaints  regarding
        Complainant’s performance/conduct and if so, when did the
        investigation occur (prior to or after Complainant’s termination).
        Finally, these affidavits shall also address whether Complainant
        continued to be employed by CGI on other projects subsequent to
        her termination from the Agency’s facility in San Diego.

     4. The Agency shall either issue a new final decision either dismissing
        the formal complaint, with appeal rights to the Commission, or a
        letter accepting Complainant’s complaint for investigation.

     5. A copy of the supplemental investigation and new dismissal letter or
        letter of acceptance shall be provided as set forth below in the section
        entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”

       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the
Commission’s corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days
of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital
format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket
number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in
the digital format required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when
previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions
to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant
may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to
enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or following an
administrative petition for enforcement.   See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407,
1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
                                      11                           2024003773

Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right
to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for
enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the
deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the
Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of
the orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in
the referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                        RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx
                                      12                           2024003773

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative
processing of your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you
have the right to file such action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred
and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with
the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official
Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not
the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action
will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                      13                           2024003773

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).



FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________               Carlton M. Hadden’s si
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


October 31, 2024
Date
