             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013




                                         Dominica H., 1
                                         Complainant,

                                                v.

                                       Antony Blinken,
                                          Secretary,
                                      Department of State,
                                           Agency.

                                    Request No. 2023002422

                                    Appeal No. 2022000781

                                   Agency No. DOS-0050-21


                    DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION


Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission) reconsider its decision in Dominica H. v. Department of State, EEOC Appeal No.
2022000781 (Feb. 15, 2023). EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its
discretion, grant a request to reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision
will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

Complainant, an FS-02 Supervisory Public Affairs Officer with the U.S. Embassy in Bujumbura,
Burundi, filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her based on
race (Black) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when she was involuntarily
curtailed.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                      2023002422

Following an investigation, Complainant requested a final agency decision. In the final decision,
the Agency determined that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as
alleged. In the appellate decision, the Commission affirmed the final decision.

In her request for reconsideration, Complainant expresses her disagreement with the previous
decision and largely reiterates arguments previously made on appeal.

We have reviewed the various arguments raised by Complainant in the instant request for
reconsideration. However, we can find no basis to disturb the Commission's prior decision.
Complainant presents arguments which were previously raised and considered or could have
been raised during the original appeal. The Commission emphasizes that a request for
reconsideration is not a second appeal. Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9 § VI.A (Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep't
of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20, 2007). Rather, a reconsideration request is
an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous
interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices,
or operations of the Agency. Complainant has not done so here. Thus, we conclude that
Complainant has not presented any persuasive evidence to support reconsideration of the
Commission's decision.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds that the
request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the decision of the
Commission to DENY the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2022000781 remains the
Commission's decision. There is no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the
Commission on this request.

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0610)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of administrative appeal
from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive
this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by his or her
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission.
                                                 3                                      2023002422

The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not
alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right
to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 11, 2023
Date
