              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                            Nadine R., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                     Jessica Rosenworcel,
                                         Chairwoman,
                             Federal Communications Commission,
                                            Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2023003472

                                  Agency No. FCC-EEO-21-04

                                           DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s April 24, 2023, final
decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                                      ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues presented concern whether Complainant was discriminated against based on race
(African American) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when she was deprived of
management training, removed from management training courses, and deprived of a proper
evaluation process.

                                        BACKGROUND

During the relevant time, Complainant worked as a non-supervisory Attorney Advisor, GS-15 at
the Agency’s Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau in Washington, D.C.

Believing that she had been subjected to discrimination, Complainant initiated EEO counseling on
March 24, 2021.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                2                                     2023003472

On January 28, 2022, Complainant’s received the Agency’s Notice of Right to File a Formal
Complaint. She ultimately filed a formal EEO complaint that same day, alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her and subjected her to harassment on the bases of race (African American)
and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

       1. On March 9, 2021, Complainant was deprived of management training and removed
          from her management training courses entitled, “Managing Attendance and Leave”,
          “USA Performance Supervisory Refresher Training”, and “Telework at the FCC
          Training” while other employees were permitted to attend management training, thus
          amounting to a change to the terms and conditions of her employment; and
       2. On March 23, 2021, the terms and conditions of her employment were changed when
          Complainant was deprived of a proper evaluation process and requested to sign
          performance-related forms attesting she engaged in activities she did not participate in.
The investigation revealed that, concerning claim 1, Complainant registered for three training
courses with the Agency: “Telework at the [Agency],” “Managing Attendance and Leave,” and
“USA Performance Supervisory Refresher.” See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 26. On February
25, 2021, Complainant received an email stating that those courses were for supervisors only. ROI
at 27. Complainant conceded that she was the only person classified as a non-supervisory official
who was enrolled in those three classes. ROI at 196. Complainant was able to sign up for the
courses in error and was removed from the roster. ROI at 27, 233. On March 9, 2021, Complainant
asked why she was unable to attend the courses and Acting Chief, Labor Relations and
Performance Management (Acting Chief) reinforced that the courses were for supervisors only.
ROI at 26.

Acting Chief specified that there was a coding error that allowed Complainant to initially register
for the enumerated courses. ROI at 258. Designated codes dictated who was allowed to sign up for
each class offered by the Agency. ROI at 261. In this case, the three courses that Complainant
wanted to take should have been coded “2,” which limited the registrants to managers and
supervisors. ROI at 261. However, the wrong code was entered, which inadvertently allowed non-
supervisory individuals, such as Complainant, to register for the course. ROI at 261. As such,
Complainant was erroneously allowed to sign up for the class. ROI at 262. When the coding error
was discovered, the rosters of the classes were inspected to ensure that only supervisors were
registered for the class. ROI at 262. As Complainant was registered, but not a supervisor, she was
removed from the classes. ROI at 262.

Acting Chief stated that there were two exceptions to non-supervisors being allowed to sign up for
supervisor classes. ROI at 262. The first exception involved Bureau Chiefs and their Chiefs of
Staff. Acting Chief explained that while the Agency did not consider them to be supervisors, they
were allowed to take the classes on a case-by-case basis because they may encounter situations
that would require them to have supervisory training, such as advising supervisors on proper
protocol for handling supervisory matters. ROI at 262. The other exception concerned non-
supervisory management officials, who were allowed to attend Labor Relations 101, because their
job duties may require them to handle and implement policy changes and negotiate with the Union.
                                                3                                     2023003472

ROI at 262. The Comparator offered by Complainant was a non-supervisory management official,
who was allowed to register for the Labor Relations 101 class, which was different than the classes
that Complainant had signed up for. ROI at 282.

As to claim 2, Complainant’s first-level supervisor (Supervisor) was responsible for creating
Complainant’s performance plans. ROI at 236. The Labor Specialist explained that Complainant’s
Supervisor rated Complainant as fully successful, but he inadvertently put Complainant on a
supervisory plan, which was the wrong plan. ROI at 236. Because Complainant’s Supervisor did
not use the correct plan, he did not complete Complainant’s rating for Fiscal Year 2020. ROI at
236. Complainant explained that she did not feel that she could sign her performance appraisal
because she was not a supervisor and, as such, had not participated in one of the core competencies
on the evaluation. ROI at 238. When Complainant did not sign a performance appraisal, the bypass
procedure was used to move her performance appraisal through the system. ROI at 236.

There were, purportedly, numerous years of performance plans that Complainant did not sign. ROI
at 237. In fact, she had three open performance plans for fiscal year 2021. ROI at 238. Labor
Specialist reasoned that the fact that Supervisor used the wrong performance plan could explain
why Complainant believed she was asked to sign performance plans she did not participate in. ROI
at 237. This technical mistake could have been corrected by Complainant signing one of the plans,
which she did not do. ROI at 237-38. Because Complainant did not sign these performance plans,
the plans became stuck in the system. ROI at 237. As such, Supervisor had to move the process
and the only way to do this was to use the bypass system. ROI at 237. LER Specialist averred that
he did not technically sign Complainant’s performance appraisal. ROI at 236. Rather, this was the
mechanism by which the bypass system was implemented. ROI a 236.

On March 23, 2021, Complainant asked why she was required to sign a performance plan when
there was no basis for it. ROI at 30. Labor Specialist informed Complainant that there was a glitch
in the performance appraisal system that required a new plan be created. ROI at 30. He explained
the bypass function to Complainant in an email. ROI at 236, 241-42. Despite Labor Specialist’s
explanation of the glitch and the need for the use of the bypass system, Complainant expressed her
disbelief in LER Specialist’s explanation, continuing to assert that LER Specialist was asking her
to sign a “falsehood.” ROI at 241.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ) on February 22, 2023. On February 23, 2023,
Complainant requested a final agency decision. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the
Agency issued a final decision on April 24, 2023, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), which
concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as
alleged. Complainant filed the instant appeal.
                                                 4                                      2023003472

                                  CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant seeks default judgment against the Agency as a sanction for the Agency’s
failure to timely advise her of her right to file a formal complaint and investigate her allegations
of discrimination. Complainant argues that sanctions are warranted because the Agency failed to
comply with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(g), which requires agencies to notify complainants of their right
to request a hearing or file a civil action in federal court after more than 180 days have elapsed.

As for the merits of the complaint, Complainant argues that she has been an excellent employee
for over 20 years. She would like the opportunity to be a supervisor and, as such, would benefit
from supervisory classes. She states that she has taken over 80 such classes and it was only recently
that her ability to take supervisory classes changed. Complainant alleges that the Agency’s
decision to disallow her from taking management courses harmed her career prospects, as she
could no longer take courses that would further her goal of becoming a supervisor. Moreover, she
said that the fact that another Agency employee, not a supervisor, was allowed to attend a class
intended for supervisors indicates that she was treated in a disparate manner. As for her evaluation,
Complainant alleges that management’s actions denied her the benefit of a valid performance
evaluation.

The Agency opposes the appeal and argues that sanctions are not warranted. While the Agency
acknowledges that there was a delay in processing her January 28, 2022, complaint, and that the
ROI was not issued until February 2023, the Agency argues that sanctions are not warranted
because Complainant never expressed any dissatisfaction with the way the Agency processed her
complaint. Citing to Truman B. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120181960 (Aug. 15,
2018), the Agency argues that Complainant’s failure to do so is fatal to her request for sanctions.
Furthermore, the Agency argues that sanctions are not warranted because the delays were due to
internal coordination issues and emphasizes that Complainant never specifically explained how
she was prejudiced by either the delays or the Agency’s failure to timely provide the requisite
notices.

Finally, regarding the merits of the complaint, the Agency argues that Complainant cannot prevail
because it had legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, which Complainant failed to
persuasively rebut. Furthermore, while the Agency does not dispute that Complainant engaged in
protected EEO activity and that management was aware of her protected EEO activity, the Agency
argues that Complainant’s claim of reprisal must fail because management’s decision to prohibit
a non-supervisor, such as Complainant, from taking supervisory training courses, does not
constitute adverse treatment that would reasonably deter her and others from exercising their
protected rights.

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
                                                  5                                     2023003472

See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                            ANALYSIS

Preliminary Matters - Sanctions

Initially, we address Complainant’s request for sanctions against the Agency for its failure to
timely issue her notice of her right to file a formal complaint, investigate her allegations of
discrimination, and issue her a notice pursuant to § 1614.108(g).

Sanctions serve a dual purpose. On the one hand, they aim to deter the underlying conduct of the
non-complying party and prevent similar misconduct in the future. Barbour v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 07A30133 (June 16, 2005). On the other hand, they are corrective and provide
equitable remedies to the opposing party.

Given these dual purposes, sanctions must be tailored to each situation by applying the least severe
sanction necessary to respond to a party's failure to show good cause for its actions and to equitably
remedy the opposing party. Royal v. Dep’t of Veterans Aff., EEOC Request No. 0520080052
(Sept. 25, 2009). Factors pertinent to “tailoring” a sanction, or determining whether a sanction is
even warranted, include: (1) the extent and nature of the non-compliance, including the
justification presented by the non-complying party; (2) the prejudicial effect of the non-compliance
on the opposing party; (3) the consequences resulting from the delay in justice, if any; (4) the
number of times the party has engaged in such conduct; and (5) the effect on the integrity of the
EEO process as a whole. Id.

EEOC Management Directive 110 (MD-110) states that an Agency must conduct the final
interview and issue Complainant a Notice of Right to File a Discrimination Complaint within 30
days of the date the aggrieved person brought the dispute to the EEO Counselor’s attention. In this
case, Complainant first contacted the EEO Counselor on March 29, 2021. ROI at 8. She received
her Notice of Right to File a Discrimination Complaint on January 27, 2022. ROI at 9.

EEOC regulation 29 CF.R. § 1614.108(e) provides that the Agency shall complete its investigation
within 180 days of the date of the filing of an individual complaint. In this case, Complainant filed
her complaint on January 28, 2022. ROI at 9. There is no evidence that Complainant voluntarily
extended the Agency’s deadline. The Agency issued Complainant the report of investigation on
                                                 6                                      2023003472

February 22, 2023. The Agency issued Complainant a final decision on the merits of her complaint
on April 24, 2023, within sixty days of Complainant’s request for a final decision.

While we find that the Agency violated EEOC’s regulations by failing to timely issue the required
notices, we are disinclined to impose sanctions against the Agency because Complainant did not
persuasively show that she was prejudiced by the Agency’s failures. Thus, although the Agency
failed to comply with the Commission’s regulations, the Commission finds that the Agency did
not act in a manner to warrant sanctions. See Cassy W. v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No.
2019001419 (Jun. 18, 2020) (the Commission declined to sanction an agency for the untimely
issuance of the final decision by 170 days because the delay did not prejudice the complainant or
result in an unconscionable delay in justice).

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For Complainant to prevail, she must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802, n. 13; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978).

In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on race, a complainant may show:
(1) they are a member of a protected group; (2) they were subjected to an adverse employment
action; and (3) that they were treated less favorably than other similarly situated employees outside
of their protected groups. We note that, although a complainant bears the burden of establishing
a “prima facie” case, Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (1981), the
requirements are “minimal,” St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 506 (1993), and
complainant's burden is “not onerous.” Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253.

For a claim of reprisal, a complainant must show that: (1) they were engaged in a protected activity;
(2) the agency was aware of the protected activity; (3) subsequently, they were subjected to adverse
treatment by the agency; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected activity and the adverse
treatment. Whitmire v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No. 01A00340 (Sept. 25, 2000). A
complainant can also establish a prima facie case of reprisal by presenting facts that, if
unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination. Shapiro v. Social Sec. Admin.,
EEOC Request No. 05960403 (Dec. 6, 1996) (citing McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802).

The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Tex. Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has
met its burden, the complainant bears the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a
preponderance of the evidence that the agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. St. Mary’s
Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).
                                                 7                                      2023003472


At the outset, we find that Complainant can establish a prima facie case of discrimination based
on race. The record demonstrates that she is a member of protected class by virtue of her race and
that management was aware of her race. Complainant also suffered adverse treatment when
management denied her requests for training. As Complainant identified a Caucasian individual,
who was allegedly treated more favorably, we find that Complainant can establish a prima facie
case of discrimination based on race.

As for reprisal, the Agency does not dispute that Complainant engaged in protected EEO activity
and that management was aware of her protected EEO activity. While the Agency argues that the
management’s decision to disallow Complainant from taking supervisory training courses does
not constitute adverse treatment that would reasonably deter her and others from exercising their
protected rights, we note that Complainant alleges on appeal that she had been allowed to take
supervisory courses before she engaged in EEO activity and that after she engaged in EEO activity,
she was no longer allowed to do so. As Complainant alleges that the Agency’s decision to disallow
her from attending supervisory courses harmed her career prospects, we find that her allegations,
if true, would be sufficient to dissuade her and others from engaging in EEO activity. Because we
find that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination based on race and reprisal,
the burden now shifts to the Agency to articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions.

Regarding claim 1, the record shows that a coding error allowed Complainant to enroll in the
selected courses. These courses were intended for supervisors, only, and Complainant was not a
supervisor. When the coding error was discovered, Complainant was removed from the course.

As to claim 2, Supervisor erroneously used the incorrect performance plan, one with a similar but
not identical plan number. This incorrect plan was not signed by Complainant and, as such, it was
stuck in the system. Thus, the Agency was required to utilize a bypass system that did not require
Complainant to sign the document.

Without proof of a demonstrably discriminatory motive, the Commission will not generally
second-guess the Agency’s personnel decisions, such as disciplinary actions. See Chavez v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120055246 (Jan. 5. 2007); see also Carson v. Bethlehem Steel
Corp., 82 F.3d 157, 159 (7th Cir. 1982) (noting that “the question is not whether the employer made
the best, or even a sound, business decision; it is whether the real reason [was discriminatory]”).

Pretext can be demonstrated by showing such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies,
incoherencies, or contradictions in the Agency's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a
reasonable fact finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. Larraine D. v. Dep't of
Def., EEOC Appeal No. 2022002980 (Oct. 27, 2022). Indicators of pretext include discriminatory
statements or past personal treatment attributable to those responsible for the personnel action that
led to the filing of the complaint, unequal application of Agency policy, deviations from standard
procedures without explanation or justification, and inadequately explained inconsistencies in the
                                                 8                                     2023003472

evidentiary record. Tammy S. v. Dep't of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 2021000578 (May 5,
2022).

Having reviewed the record and Complainant’s appellate brief, we find no evidence that
Complainant’s protected classes were a factor in any of the Agency’s actions. At all times, the
ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that
the Agency’s reasons were not the real reasons and that the Agency acted on the basis of
discriminatory animus. While we are certainly mindful of Complainant’s arguments on appeal, we
are ultimately not persuaded by her arguments, as they are largely speculative and consist mainly
of her disagreement with management’s actions.

To the extent Complainant offers a comparator on appeal, stating that he was not a supervisor but
was allowed to enroll in such a course, we disagree. The offered comparator enrolled in a different
course, and this course was specifically indicated as a course where exceptions could be made
because there were issues applicable to non-supervisory staff. To be a valid comparator, all
relevant aspects of the comparator’s work situation must be nearly identical to that of Complainant.
See Martinez v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120113436 (Nov. 1, 2011). As
Complainant signed up for different classes than the individual asserted, he is not a valid
comparator for purposes of proving discrimination.

In light of the above, we find that a finding of harassment is precluded due to our determination
that Complainant failed to establish that the actions taken by the Agency were motivated by
discriminatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01932923 (Sep. 21,
2000).

                                         CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.


                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)



The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:


       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                  9                                      2023003472



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in support
of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

                COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must
name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department
head, identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the
dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and
not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.
                                                  10                                      2023003472

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                           Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


April 24, 2024
Date
