           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Irene R., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                            Denis R. McDonough,
                                 Secretary,
                       Department of Veterans Affairs
                      (Veterans Health Administration),
                                  Agency.

                          Appeal No. 2022001831

                       Hearing No. 420-2020-00264X

                    Agency No. 2003-0520-2019104694

                                 DECISION

On February 16, 2022, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s January 21, 2022 final order
concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq., and the Pregnancy Discrimination Act (PDA), as amended, 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000e(k). For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s
final order and REMANDS the matter for a supplemental investigation.




1 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2022001831

                              ISSUES PRESENTED

   1. Whether the AJ’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the Agency
      was appropriate, or whether genuine disputes of material fact exist that
      require a hearing.
   2. Whether the record establishes that the Agency discriminated against
      Complainant based on her race (Caucasian), sex (female), disability
      (breast feeding lactation) and in reprisal for prior EEO protected activity.


                                 BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Registered Nurse, at the Gulf Coast Veterans Healthcare System in Biloxi,
Mississippi. On November 2, 2019, Complainant filed an EEO complaint
alleging that the Agency discriminated against her and subjected her to a
hostile work environment on the bases of race (Caucasian), sex (female),
disability (breast feeding lactation) and in reprisal for prior EEO protected
opposition activity 2 when:

      1. on June 10, 2019, the Nurse Manager (Supervisor1) (Caucasian,
         female, not lactating or pregnant) and Chief of Nursing (Supervisor2)
         (Caucasian, male) temporarily detailed Complainant to the day shift
         of 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., from the night shift of 11:00 p.m. to 7:30
         a.m. during a factfinding investigation;

      2. ongoing from June 20, 2019, Supervisor1, Supervisor2 and the Local
         Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator (LRAC) (African American,
         female, not lactating or pregnant), failed to approve Complainant’s
         request for reasonable accommodation and Family and Medical Leave
         Act (FMLA) leave; and

      3. on July 12, 2019, Supervisor1 charged Complainant eight hours of
         Absent Without Leave (AWOL).




2 The Agency dismissed reprisal as a basis of discrimination finding that there

was no evidence that Complainant engaged in any prior protected EEO
activity.
                                       3                          2022001831

Amendment to Complaint

On January 30, 2020, Complainant responded to the Agency’s Notice of Partial
Acceptance setting forth the above claims, by seeking an amendment to her
complaint. On January 31, 2020, Complainant sent two emails to the Agency’s
Office of Resolution Management (ORM), the Agency’s responsible office for
processing EEO complaints. Attached to the email was an MS-Word document
entitled “RESPONSE TO EEO FORMAL INVESTIGATION.” This document explicitly
stated that Complainant wished to add her termination (effective January 31,
2020) as a new claim to her pending EEO complaint on the basis of reprisal. The
Agency took no action, did not dismiss the amendment, and did not investigate
the amendment. At the hearing stage, the EEOC Administrative Judge did not
take any action or render any decision on the request to amend.

Claim 1 – Temporary Reassignment to Day Shift

At the time of this incident, Complainant was assigned as a float pool
registered nurse on the night shift on the Inpatient Mental Health Unit where
she provided direct patient care. On or about June 7, 2019, Complainant was
notified via telephone from Supervisor1 that effective June 10, 2019, her tour
of duty would be changed from the night shift to the day shift, pending the
outcome of a fact-finding investigation into allegations of inattentiveness to
duty. According to management, the night shift staff did not respond to a
patient’s call button who reported that she fell. Management asserted that
the security footage during the relevant timeframe showed Complainant and
another Registered Nurse (Coworker1) (male, race unknown) to be in sleep-
like positions at the time. Complainant strenuously denied these charges.
Complainant immediately objected to the shift change due to her lactation
issues.

The Agency asserted that it is customary in fact-finding investigations
involving patient harm, to temporarily detail the employee out of direct patient
care, and to a non-patient care position. Complainant asserted that there was
no formal Agency requirement that the temporary detail involve a shift
change. Complainant asserted that while the fact-finding investigation did
require that she be detailed away from direct patient care, there was no
reason to put her on a daytime shift, nor has the Agency demonstrated that
such was necessary. The record contains testimony from the Chief Nurse
(Chief) asserting that during the relevant timeframe, there were no non-
patient care positions available on the night shift.
                                      4                           2022001831

Coworker1 who worked with Complainant on the night shift in the Inpatient
Mental Health Unit and subjected to the same fact-finding investigation for
inattentiveness that Complainant was subjected to, was also detailed to the
day shift.

Claim 2 – Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

Complainant indicated that she would have to take leave and specifically that
she would not be able to report to the day shift on June 10, 2019, due to the
fact that she needed to be available to breast feed her infant son (who was
resistant to bottle-feeding) during the daytime. Therefore, pumping breast
milk at the worksite was not an option for Complainant. Complainant’s child
cluster-fed throughout the day and would sleep all night. Consequently,
Complainant required a night shift in order to breastfeed her son during the
day and meet the nutritional demands of her child. Complainant explained
that if she was forced to work the day shift, she would have to telework or
take leave through August 2019. 3 On June 10, 2019, Complainant verbally
requested a reasonable accommodation to address her breast-feeding
childcare issues. She specifically requested that she be: (a) allowed to return
to the night shift, (b) allowed to telework during the day shift, (c) permitted
to have her baby to come to work in the office with her, or (d) granted LWOP.

Also, on June 10, 2019, Complainant sent an email to Supervisor1,
Supervisor2, and her union representative seeking FMLA leave as an
alternative to working the day shift.      On June 11, 2019, Supervisor2
responded stating: “I am attaching the requested FMLA forms. Please
understand that your eligibility may be limited, as you have already utilized
16 weeks of FMLA in the previous 12 months.” 4 On June 12, 2019,
Supervisor2 advised Complainant by email that she had exhausted all FMLA
leave but that he would agree to allow her to use any of her accrued leave.

On June 17, 2019, Complainant filled out a request for “Written Confirmation
of Request for Accommodation.” This request specifically requested an
accommodation of either remaining on the night shift, telework, or allowing
the baby to come to the office with her, and explicitly stated that her son was
“significantly resistive” to bottle feeding and that the pediatrician had
recommended that he continue to be breast fed until his first birthday on or

3 Complainant’s child was turning a year old in August 2019 and Complainant

planned to ween him off breast feeding around that time.
4 Complainant had taken FMLA the previous year from June to October 2018,

for the birth of her son.
                                      5                          2022001831

about August 7, 2019. Complainant copied both Supervisor1 and Supervisor2
on this request. Complainant attached a signed document from her
pediatrician, indicating that “[c]ontinued breastfeeding, specifically baby to
breast, is medically necessary, due to persistent resistance to formula and/or
bottle-feeding.”

On June 20, 2019, the Agency rejected Complainant’s request for
accommodation because lactation was not a disability covered by the
Rehabilitation Act. Supervisor2 stated that the request was denied because it
“did not meet the operational needs of the facility.” Since Complainant had
returned from her pregnancy leave in October 2018, she had been working
the night shift without issue. On June 24, 2019, Complainant emailed
Supervisor2 stating in part: “I did not proceed with having the pediatrician
complete the FMLA paperwork for submission since I received confirmation
from you last week that my benefits have been exhausted.”

Complainant exhausted all of her accrued leave on or about July 11, 2019.
On or about July 11, 2019, Supervisor1 sent Complainant a letter indicating
that she had exhausted all of her leave and that she would be considered
AWOL after that date. On July 11, 2019, Complainant emailed Supervisor2
requesting 40 hours of Leave without Pay (LWOP) and indicating that she
preferred to return to work. On July 12, 2019, Supervisor2 denied this
request. On July 22, 2019, Supervisor2 drafted a memorandum to the
Associate Director for Patient Care Services (Associate Director) (male, race
unknown), recommending denying Complainant’s request for LWOP.

Supervisor2’s July 22, 2019, memorandum provided, in part:

     [Complainant] has been notified by me and her direct supervisor
     that Reasonable Accommodations, FMLA, or LWOP for breast
     feeding an infant would not likely meet the technical requirements
     for any of these programs. Further, [Complainant] has exhausted
     her FMLA entitlement, using the full 16 weeks after the delivery of
     her child in late 2018. [Complainant] was informed that we have
     multiple options for lactating mothers, including approved
     lactation rooms at the facility and she would be given appropriate
     time and privacy to express breast milk while working a day shift
     tour.
                                       6                        2022001831

Complainant asserted that her FMLA rights should have rolled over starting
June 28, 2019 (i.e., one year after she started her FMLA in 2018).5
Complainant argued that by July 12, 2019, she should have approximately
two weeks of FMLA available as the Agency is supposed to use a rolling FMLA
leave policy. 6 Complainant further stated that the Agency appeared to be
incorrectly arguing that she would not be entitled to FMLA until October 15,
2019, a year after she returned from her FMLA leave.

In response to Complainant’s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, the
Agency provided an affidavit from a Human Resources Specialist (HR
Specialist) who asserted that Complainant never checked FMLA on any of her
leave requests or filled out any other FMLA forms during the summer of 2019.
This explanation for denying FMLA leave contradicted the documentary
evidence establishing that S1 and S2 explicitly advised Complainant that she
had exhausted her FMLA leave. Moreover, the documentary evidence
establishes that Complainant explicitly told her supervisors that she did not
submit any FMLA leave forms because she was told by management that she
was not entitled to such leave.

Complainant further asserted that two African American females, who were
not lactating and/or pregnant who were also accused of inattention to duty
and an African American male coworker accused of wrongdoing were allowed
to remain on the night shift pending the outcome of their investigations. In
addition, according to Supervisor1’s affidavit, sometime after Complainant
returned to duty (in late August 2019) she was “allowed a modified day shift
schedule to accommodate school age childcare issues.”

Claim 3 - AWOL




5 Complainant explains that a rolling FMLA leave policy means that one would

gain one week of FMLA eligibility as they “rolled” off.
6 No management official has addressed this claim.
                                        7                           2022001831


Although management had the discretionary power to grant Complainant
LWOP, and it is unclear whether Complainant was eligible to take FMLA leave,
the Agency did not permit Complainant to take LWOP. Accordingly,
management notified Complainant that her absenteeism would be recorded
as AWOL. Complainant returned to work on August 29, 2019. At this time,
she had accumulated numerous AWOL charges. On January 31, 2020,
Complainant was terminated, in part, due to her unauthorized absences and
in part due to her alleged misconduct which she strenuously denied.
Coworker1 was not terminated. The record is devoid of testimonial or
documentary evidence explaining why Coworker1 and Complainant were
treated differently.


At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC AJ.         Complainant timely requested a hearing.           Over
Complainant's objections, the AJ assigned to the case granted the Agency’s
motion and issued a summary judgment decision in favor of the Agency finding
that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination as alleged.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order fully adopting the AJ’s decision.
The instant appeal followed.


                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant asserts that the Agency improperly failed to accept and
investigate the termination claim that she raised as an amendment to this
complaint on January 31, 2020. Complainant argues that, at a minimum, the
case must be remanded for a proper investigation on this issue. Complainant
also asserts that the Agency improperly dismissed her reprisal claim.
Specifically, Complainant argues that she did engage in protected EEO activity
prior to the adverse actions.      In particular, she requested a lactation
accommodation which is a protected activity, and she contends the Agency’s
actions thereafter could indeed be considered retaliatory.

Complainant further asserts that even if she failed to identify similarly situated
comparators outside of her protected classifications who were treated more
favorably (which she denies) the failure to produce a comparator is not
dispositive where the record contains some other evidence of disparate
treatment which Complainant asserts has been established. In addition,
                                       8                          2022001831

Complainant argues that the Agency has failed to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason why she could not be accommodated during the
fact-finding investigation.

Complainant argues that alternatively, she established that she was an
individual with a disability under the Rehabilitation Act since she has
established medical complications due to pregnancy since her lactation
challenges and her baby’s medical complications are directly correlated.
Specifically, she argues that the record establishes that her baby was under
doctor’s orders to continue breastfeeding exclusively breast-to-mouth,
because he had medical challenges and refused to bottle feed. She argues
that any medical complication related to lactation issues is sufficient to
establish a medical impairment.

Complainant further argues that under the PDA, she was entitled to summary
judgment in her favor because the Agency has failed to prove that granting
her a reasonable accommodation was an undue burden.

                           STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

The Commission's regulations allow an AJ to grant summary judgment when
he or she finds that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.109(g). An issue of fact is “genuine” if the evidence is such that a
reasonable fact finder could find in favor of the non-moving party. Celotex v.
Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d
103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A fact is “material” if it has the potential to affect
the outcome of the case. In rendering this appellate decision, we must
scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions, and the Agency’s final order
adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a)(stating that a “decision
on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo
                                        9                           2022001831

review…”); see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015)
(providing that an administrative judge’s determination to issue a decision
without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed de novo).

                                   ANALYSIS

In order to successfully oppose a decision by summary judgment, a
complainant must identify, with specificity, facts in dispute either within the
record or by producing further supporting evidence and must further establish
that such facts are material under applicable law. Such a dispute would
indicate that a hearing is necessary to produce evidence to support a finding
that the Agency was motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus. In the
instant case, we find that the AJ's summary judgment decision was not
appropriate because there are material facts in dispute, and the record is not
adequately developed, as discussed below.

Termination Claim

Contrary to the Agency’s assertion, Complainant asserts that she never filed or
authorized the filing of a union grievance with respect to her termination claim.7
We find that Complainant timely responded to the Agency’s Notice of Partial
Acceptance dated January 3, 2020, in a January 31, 2020 email which clarified
her claims and timely added a claim of unlawful termination. 8 Specifically, the
attachment to the January 31, 2020 email to ORM states in part: “[a] separate
RETALIATION charge should be added – specifically in relation to my
termination.”

The attachment further clarified that Complainant was raising a claim of
discrimination on the basis of lactation/breastfeeding accommodation matter
(under the Pregnancy Discrimination Act) which was not entirely clear from the
accepted issues. Complainant also added:

      For example, an African American male was allowed to stay on his
      night shift tour of duty during a fact-finding investigation simply

7 The Agency seems to argue in its responsive motions that Complainant’s
amended complaint was a union grievance (perhaps because the union replied
to the proposed removal on Complainant’s behalf), but Complainant asserts
that she never filed or authorized a filing of a union grievance in regard to the
termination, nor is there documentation regarding such in the record.
8 Complainant received the January 3, 2020, Notice of Partial Acceptance of

Claims on January 24, 2020.
                                      10                          2022001831

      due to “childcare issues” while others were detailed to days. This
      is a request I continually made but was not granted- and my
      issues were much more complex than just “childcare issues”,
      considering no one but myself could breast feed my child-
      supplying him the appropriate nutrients required for growth and
      development.

Complainant further requested that the EEO investigator seek additional
information from the Agency to determine (for example):

      How long have people been allowed to be on LWOP or AWOL status
      before actual termination occurs in the past ten years?

      When were people detailed for fact findings – how many people
      and in what situations have others been allowed to remain in their
      regular tour of duty while investigation was completed?

We find that the Agency failed to properly develop the record and investigate
Complainant's claims of termination based on reprisal, sex and race. 9 During
the EEO investigation, Complainant was not represented by an attorney. It
has long been the policy of the courts to liberally construe pro se filings to
minimize the risk of a miscarriage of justice. See Wright v. C.I.R., 571 F. 3d
215, 219 (2d Cir. 2009) (appellate submissions of pro se litigants interpreted
“to raise the strongest possible arguments they suggest.”) (Citation omitted);
see also Comer v. Peake, 552 F. 3d 1362, 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (citing Hughes
v. Rowe, 449 U.S. 5, 15 (1980)) (a pleading drafted by a pro se litigant is held
to a lesser standard). Such a policy is appropriate in the Commission's
adjudicatory process because the risk of injustice is no less real. See
Complainant v. Dep't of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 0520140248 (Aug. 7, 2015).

Dismissal of Reprisal Claim

Complainant raised the basis of reprisal in her initial EEO complaint. The
Agency dismissed this basis and the AJ concurred in her Post Initial Scheduling
Conference Order of June 4, 2021. We disagree with the Agency and AJ. The
record shows that Complainant engaged in protected EEO activity in the form

9 While Complainant does not explicitly assert sex or race tobe one of the
reasons for the termination, she did identify an African American male
coworker who she believes was treated more favorably under similar
conditions. Accordingly, we believe the investigation should investigate all
three bases.
                                       11                          2022001831

of requesting a lactation accommodation under Title VII and the Rehabilitation
Act. See Complainant v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120113118
(2014) (finding a request for accommodation under the Rehabilitation Act
amounts to protected EEO activity). Accordingly, we find that Complainant is
entitled to a full investigation and an opportunity to develop the record on this
matter.

Pregnancy Discrimination Act – Disparate Treatment of Accommodations

The Commission has held that a complainant's status as a nursing mother is
protected under the PDA. See O'Brien v. National Security Agency, EEOC
Appeal No. 01951902 (May 27, 1997). The PDA requires that an agency treat
women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions the
same for all employment related purposes, as other persons not so affected
but similar in their ability or inability to do work. 42 U.S.C. 2000e(k) (1994).
An employee who is lactating “must have the same freedom to address such
lactation-related needs that she and her co-workers would have to address
other similarly limiting medical conditions.” See EEOC Enforcement Guidance:
Pregnancy Discrimination and Related Issues, EEOC Notice 915.003, I
(A)(4)(b) (rev. June 25, 2015) (Pregnancy Guidance).

      To continue producing an adequate milk supply and to avoid
      painful complications associated with delays in expressing milk, a
      nursing mother will typically need to breastfeed or express breast
      milk using a pump two or three times over the duration of an
      eight-hour workday. An employee must have the same freedom
      to address such lactation-related needs that she and her co-
      workers would have to address other similarly limiting medical
      conditions. For example, if an employer allows employees to
      change their schedules or use sick leave for routine doctor
      appointments and to address non-incapacitating medical
      conditions, then it must allow female employees to change their
      schedules or use sick leave for lactation-related needs under
      similar circumstances.

Id. Discriminating against a woman who is lactating or expressing breast milk
violates Title VII and the PDA. EEOC v. Houston Funding II, Ltd., 717 F.3d
425, 430 (5th Cir. 2013). Title VII mandates the provision of a reasonable
accommodation for an employee who is lactating. Gonzales v. Marriott Int'l,
Inc., 142 F. Supp. 3d 961, 978 (C.D. Cal. 2015) (citing Young v. United Parcel
Serv., 135 S. Ct. 1338, 1354 (2015)).
                                       12                          2022001831

Complainant alleging that the denial of an accommodation for a pregnancy
related condition constituted disparate treatment sex discrimination may state
a prima facie case by showing that: (1) she belongs to the protected class;
(2) she sought accommodation; (3) the agency did not accommodate her;
and (4) that the agency did accommodate others “similar in their ability or
inability to work.” Young, 135 S. Ct. at 1354. An agency may then seek to
justify its refusal to accommodate the complainant by relying on “legitimate,
nondiscriminatory” reasons for denying her accommodation. Id. at 1354
(citing, McDonnell Douglas v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802 (1973)). “That reason
normally cannot consist simply of a claim that it is more expensive or less
convenient to add pregnant women to the category of those (‘similar in their
ability or inability to work’) whom the employer accommodates.” Id.

The complainant may then show that the agency's reasons are pretextual,
which can be done “by providing sufficient evidence that the employer's
policies impose a significant burden on pregnant workers, and that the
employer's “legitimate, nondiscriminatory' reasons are not sufficiently strong
to justify the burden, but rather -- when considered along with the burden
imposed -- give rise to an inference of intentional discrimination.” Young, 135
S. Ct. at 1354.

We find that the record has not been developed to sufficiently address the
question as to whether the Agency has accommodated others similar in their
ability or inability to work and if so, what is the distinguishing basis. We find
that Complainant has offered proof of a prima facie case here. She
demonstrated that she belongs to a protected class by virtue of being a
pregnant/lactating female, she sought accommodation by requesting to
remain on the night shift, to telework on the day shift, or take extended LWOP
until approximately late August 2019. Complainant also asserts that a male
coworker received accommodations in response to childcare issues. In
addition, we find that the Agency improperly fails to provide relevant
comparator information relying on the argument that it had no legal obligation
to accommodate Complainant as she is not an individual with a disability under
the Rehabilitation Act.

In order to determine whether the Agency is obligated to accommodate
Complainant under the PDA, the only relevant comparison is whether the
pregnant worker and nonpregnant worker are similar in their ability or inability
to work. Young, 135 S. Ct. at 1347-48, 1355. Moreover, this inquiry is
satisfied if the employer has a practice or policy that indicates some classes
of workers are entitled to similar accommodations, when pregnant workers
are not provided such a benefit and are similar in their ability or inability to
                                        13                           2022001831

work. We find that the record is not adequately developed to determine if the
PDA was violated. In addition, when viewing the record in the light most
favorable to Complainant, we find there is a genuine dispute as to whether
the Agency provided more favorable treatment to at least some non-
pregnant/non-lactating employees whose situation cannot reasonably be
distinguished from Complainant's. 10

The Agency has proffered as a legitimate, nondiscriminatory, reason that it
did not have an obligation to accommodate Complainant with any
accommodation because she is not medically impaired and, further, that the
requested accommodations “did not meet the operational needs of the
facility.” 11 In addition, the Agency provided an affidavit from the Chief who
affirmed that there were no non-patient care Registered Nurse positions on
the night shift. However, this statement is contradicted by Complainant’s own
testimony to the contrary. The record is also devoid of a description of what
non-direct patient care Complainant was in fact expected to perform on the
day shift or an explanation as to why such work could not be performed on
the night shift for a relatively short duration (approximately two months). 12
In addition, the Agency failed to proffer an explanation as to why any of the
other accommodations requested (e.g., LWOP or telework) were not possible
for a short duration. We also find the record devoid of evidence to support the
Agency’s assertion that each accommodation requested posed an undue burden.
The record needs to be developed on this issue to determine whether the
Agency similarly accommodated others but not a pregnant worker and
whether the bases for such a distinction are sufficiently strong to avoid liability
under Title VII. See Elease S. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0120140731 (Dec. 27, 2017).

Rehabilitation Act Claim



10 We note that the undisputed record shows that sometime after Complainant

returned to work in late August 2019 (i.e., when she was no longer a lactating
mother) her schedule was modified to accommodate “school age childcare
issues.” The fact that the Agency accommodated childcare issues for
Complainant when she was not pregnant/not lactating, but not when she was
lactating, raises a genuine issue of material fact with respect to this claim.
11 The Agency argues that it offered Complainant with a place at the worksite

to pump breast milk, but this clearly does not address Complainant’s need to
directly breast feed her infant during the day.
12 The record shows that Complainant ran out of paid leave on or about July

11, 2019, and she needed an accommodation through August 2019.
                                        14                           2022001831

We agree with the Agency, that the Rehabilitation Act does not apply here.
Pregnancy is not an “impairment” within the meaning of the ADA and is
therefore not itself a disability, although pregnancy-related impairments (e.g.,
pelvic inflammation) may be covered. 29 C.F.R. Part 1630 app. § 1630.2(h);
EEOC Enforcement Guidance, Pregnancy Discrimination and Related Issues
(Enforcement Guidance), § II.A (July 14, 2014). Similarly, lactation is not an
impairment and therefore not itself a disability. See Bond v. Sterling, Inc.,
997 F.Supp. 306, 311 (N.D.N.Y.1998) (“It is simply preposterous to contend
a woman's body is functioning abnormally because she is lactating.”).
Complainant has not alleged that she, herself, suffered any medical
impairments relating to lactation and to the extent that she contends that
breastfeeding was a matter of medical necessity for her son, “any disability
would be that of her child alone.” Id.; McNill v. New York City Dep’t. of
Correction, 950 F.Supp. 564, 569–70 (S.D.N.Y.1996) (malfunction of infant's
palate necessitating breastfeeding was not a pregnancy-related medical
condition of the mother). Accordingly, we find that Complainant has not
established that she is a person with a disability and that her claim of disability
discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act therefore fails.


                                  CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency final
action and REMAND this matter to the Agency for a supplemental investigation
as set forth herein. 13

                                     ORDER

Within ninety (90) days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
conduct a supplemental investigation: (A) regarding Complainant's
termination claim on the bases of sex, race and reprisal; (B) with respect to
the allegation of reprisal to all claims following the date Complainant
requested to remain on the night shift due to lactation issues (i.e., June 7,
2019); and (B) regarding Complainant’s PDA failure to accommodation claim.
The Agency shall obtain all relevant evidence to address Complainant's claims,
including, but not limited to:




13 As the Commission is remanding the entire complaint, we shall not address

Complainant’s harassment claim in this decision.
                                     15                          2022001831

  (1)       the Agency shall ensure the investigator makes a request for the
     testimonial and documentary evidence relevant to Complainant claim of
     wrongful termination, including but not limited to: (a) the names, job
     titles, protected classification, of all employees who have been subject
     to a fact-finding investigation for inattentiveness/sleeping on the job or
     causing harm to a patient in 2019; 14 (b) testimonial evidence and
     documentary evidence (if such exists) from Coworker1 who worked the
     night shift with Complainant, who was investigated for inattentiveness
     but was not terminated. Such testimony shall include his protected
     classifications and his witness account in response to the Agency’s
     allegations of inattentiveness with respect to his own conduct, in
     addition to Complainant’s conduct on the night in question; (c) all
     documents related to such fact-finding investigations; (d) relevant
     testimony from the responsible management officials involved in such
     fact-finding investigations; (e) testimonial evidence and documentary
     evidence (if such exists) relevant to the findings, conclusions and
     discipline issued after the completion of the fact-finding investigations;
     (f) relevant testimony from the responsible management officials
     involved in such fact-finding investigations who were responsible for
     determining whether disciplinary action should or should not be issued;
     (g) relevant testimony from responsible management officials
     addressing Complainant’s response to the fact-finding investigation as
     set forth in the January 13, 2020 letter from Complainant’s union
     representative found on pages 85 to 104 of the EEO investigative file; 15
     (h) a working copy of the surveillance video referenced in the fact-
     finding investigation or a detailed explanation as to why such video was
     never provided to Complainant; and
  (2)       The Agency shall ensure the investigator makes a request for the
     testimonial and documentary evidence relevant to Complainant’s PDA
     failure to accommodate claim, including but not limited to: (a) the
     identity of each comparison individual mentioned by Complainant; 16 (b)
     the identity of each and every nonpregnant/non-lactating worker who

14 This should include but is not limited to the nurse who Complainant alleges

harmed a patient and was only demoted. Complainant previously advised the
EEO investigator that some of this information could be obtained by the former
union president whom she names in the EEO investigative file at page 57.
15 For example, Complainant raised the issue that the patient alert system was

not working properly, and she was not assigned to the patient who was
injured.
16 This shall include but is not limited to the African American male who was

able to remain on the night shift because of childcare issues.
                                      16                          2022001831

      was similar to Complainant in the ability or inability to work (including
      protected classifications, position information, description of any
      accommodations provided and the basis for such accommodations); (c)
      testimonial evidence and documentary evidence (if such exists)
      explaining the bases for denying Complainant the option to remain on
      the night shift for two months starting in July 2019; (d) testimonial
      evidence and documentary evidence (if such exists) explaining the
      bases for denying Complainant the option to telework on the dayshift
      for two months starting in July 2019; (e) testimonial or documentary
      evidence (if such exists) explaining the bases for denying Complainant
      the option to take discretionary LWOP for two months starting in July
      2019; (f) testimonial and documentary evidence (if such exists)
      explaining why each proposed accommodation would have posed an
      undue burden on the Agency; and
   (3)       The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains testimonial
      evidence from responsible management officials and documentary
      evidence (if such exists) explaining the contradictory evidence in the
      record as to why management determined that Complainant was not
      entitled to FMLA leave in the summer of 2019; and
   (4)       The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains any other
      affidavits or documentation not specifically requested in this Order, and
      consistent with this opinion, which may be relevant in determining the
      merits of Complainant's complaint.
Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide Complainant
with a copy of the supplemental record and findings. Complainant may, within
fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the supplemental record, submit a
statement concerning the supplemental record. Thereafter, within thirty (30)
calendar days of the date the supplemental investigation is complete, the
Agency shall file a renewed request for a hearing with the Hearings Unit of the
EEOC's Birmingham District Office on Complainant's behalf, as well as a copy
of the complete complaint file and this appellate decision. The Agency shall
provide written notification to the Compliance Officer at the address set forth
below that these documents, including the complaint file, have been
transmitted to the Hearings Unit. Thereafter, the AJ shall process the
complaint in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109, and the Agency shall issue
a final action in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110.
                                       17                          2022001831

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the
Agency shall give priority to this remanded case in order to comply with the
time frames contained in this Order. The Office of Federal Operations will issue
sanctions against agencies when it determines that agencies are not making
reasonable efforts to comply with a Commission order to investigate a
complaint.

 The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital
format as provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the
Commission's Decision.” The report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector
EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §1614.403(g). Further, the report must
include evidence that the directed action has been taken.

       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION'S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the
Commission's corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days
of the completion of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit
via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital
format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket
number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is
complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the
digital format required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The
Agency's final report must contain supporting documentation when previously
not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission's order, the Complainant
may petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.503(a). The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce
compliance with the Commission's order prior to or following an administrative
petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.503(g).

Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right
to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for
enforcement or a civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the
deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the
Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated.
                                       18                          2022001831

See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409. Failure by an agency to either file a compliance
report or implement any of the orders set forth in this decision, without good
cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of Special
Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.


                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)



The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:


   1.       The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation
            of material fact or law; or
   2.       The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
            policies, practices, or operations of the agency.



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507.
                                       19                          2022001831

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).


          COMPLAINANT'S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative
processing of your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you
have the right to file such action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred
and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with
the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official
Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full name
and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action
will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.


                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs.
                                       20                          2022001831

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action,
you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit
the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney
directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                          __      Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 28, 2024
Date
