             U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Operations
                                  P.O. Box 77960
                             Washington, DC 20013


                                          Denisse Y., 1
                                          Complainant,

                                                v.

                                         Kilolo Kijakazi,
                                     Acting Commissioner,
                                 Social Security Administration,
                                             Agency.

                                    Appeal No. 2021003393

                        Agency Nos. NY200547SSA & NY200633SSA

                                           DECISION

Complainant appealed to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC” or
“Commission”), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403, from a May 3, 2021 Final Agency Decision
(“FAD”) concerning two equal employment opportunity (“EEO”) complaints alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (“Title VII”),
as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(“Rehabilitation Act”), as amended. For the following reasons, the Commission REVERSES the
Agency’s Decision and REMANDS the matter to the Agency for processing in accordance with
this decision and the Order below.

                                     ISSUES PRESENTED

    1. Whether the Agency erroneously omitted Complainant’s allegation that she was
       subjected to a hostile work environment.

    2. Whether Complainant established, by preponderance of the evidence, that she was
       subjected to discrimination as alleged.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                  2                                     2021003393

                                         BACKGROUND

When the alleged discriminatory events took place, Complainant was employed by the Agency
as a Customer Service Representative (“CSR”), GS-8, at its Newburgh Field Office (“Newburgh
FO”) in Newburgh, New York.

In 2020, Complainant filed two EEO complaints which have been consolidated for processing.

Complaint 1: Reasonable Accommodation

On June 2, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint (identified as Agency No.
NY200547SSA) alleging discrimination on the basis of her own disability (back condition)
when, on April 17, 2020 and continuing, Management denied her request for a reasonable
accommodation. 2

Complaint 2: Non-Selection and Hostile Work Environment Harassment

On August 14, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint (identified as Agency No.
NY200633SSA) alleging that she was subjected to discrimination by the Agency on the bases of
race (Black/African-American), physical disability (back condition), disability by association
(caretaker responsibilities for her child with disabilities), and/or reprisal for prior EEO activity 3
when, on July 8, 2019, she was not selected for the position of Social Insurance Specialist
(Claims Specialist), GS-105-7, 4 advertised under Vacancy No. DEU-10438667-NY-KB-19-028,
for the following New York offices: (a) Newburgh, (b) Poughkeepsie, (c) Rockland County, and
(d) Westchester County.


2
 Complainant also alleges that she was denied a reasonable accommodation to care for her son
with disabilities. However, the Agency’s duty to provide a reasonable accommodation under the
Rehabilitation Act extends only to employees and applicants for employment. See Iola F. v.
Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 2021002590 (Aug. 11, 2022) citing Helena v.
Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 07A30108 (Sept. 30, 2004) (agency did not discriminate
against complainant on the basis of disability when it denied his request for a shift change in
order to supervise an autistic child).
3
  Complainant filed EEO claims in 2012 and 2013, which were procedurally dismissed prior to
the relevant time frame for these complaints, as well as an EEO claim in 2017, which was
pending during the relevant time frame for these complaints (Agency Case No. NY170075SSA)
EEOC Hearing No. 520201700682X (Sept. 30, 2020) (alleged nonselection for the position of
Lead CSR on September 20, 2016, AJ issued decision without a hearing in favor of Agency),
Denisse Y. v. Soc. Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 2021001376 (Feb. 11, 2021) reconsideration
denied EEOC Request No. 2021003185 (Aug. 3, 2021).
4
 Based on the personnel documentation for the Selectee, hired at GS-7, full performance for the
position is GS-11.
                                                3                                     2021003393

In Complaint 2, Complainant also alleges she was denied training requests, additional instances
of non-selection, and numerous alleged hostile work environment harassment claims dating to
December 2011. As Complainant is aware, the majority of these allegations have already been
addressed in prior proceedings. The only harassment allegations in her formal EEO complaint
that have not already been addressed are as follows:

   a. On December 18, 2019, Complainant spoke with the District Manager about her
      Work from Home by Exception (“WAHBE”) request, and he said that he wanted
      her in the office more than her being out on leave.

   b. On January 30, 2020, District Manager informed Complainant to “drink some
      water so you can be well enough to go to work" and constantly asked her to
      provide a physician note of her condition when she requested to amend Telework
      by Exception.

   c. Complainant recounts that she was constantly asked for medical documentation,
      even though she provided annual updates to her FMLA forms, and “numerous
      letters from her Primary Doctor and Physical Therapist,” because these
      documents do not specify how her disabilities affect her work.

The Agency’s September 23, 2020 Notice of Acceptance for Complaint 2 did not articulate any
harassment allegations.

Reasonable Accommodation

The investigative record reveals that in 2010, Complainant was diagnosed with a hereditary
lumbar disorder (also referred to in the record as a “back condition”), which is a permanent
degenerative joint disease. The condition weakened Complainant’s lower back muscles and
impaired her ability to walk, bend, stand and sit for prolonged periods. Complainant is allergic to
certain pain medication, limiting her ability to manage her chronic pain.

In September 2011, the Agency hired Complainant to work as a CSR at the Jamaica, New York
Teleservice Center (“TSC”). Within months, she started experiencing “excruciating pain” from
muscle spasms in her back and neck because her 2-hour commute to and from the TSC
exacerbated her back condition. In May 2013, Complainant was granted a hardship transfer to
the Newburgh FO, reducing her commute to about 20 minutes each way. Complainant eventually
resolved the neck spasms with injections, but her other symptoms persisted and were exacerbated
when she was pregnant in 2015 and 2019.

From December 2018 through December 2019, Complainant was on Family & Medical Leave
Act (“FLMA”) leave to care for her son, born in January 2019, and to recover from her
pregnancy, which exacerbated her back condition.
                                                  4                                    2021003393

In November 2019, Complainant was diagnosed with Sacrococcygeal Disorder due to her
pregnancy, giving birth and an elongated tailbone (a hereditary spinal condition), causing severe
pain to her pelvic region and tailbone area, and adding to her difficulty sitting for prolonged
periods.
Complainant was the only CSR working at the Newburgh FO. All other employees reporting to
the Operations Supervisors were GS-9/11 Claims Specialists or GS-9/11 Technical Experts.
Although Complainant continued to perform her primary GS-8 CSR responsibility of answering
customer phone calls, her job duties expanded to include front desk work and tasks that were
previously completed by Claims Specialists in the Post Entitlement (“PE”) Unit. Complainant
eventually became responsible for processing paper traffic for the entire Newburgh FO.

Complainant teleworked once a week as part of an employee pilot program and used FMLA
leave on a weekly basis. Complainant alleges that because she had to take leave due to her
disability, Management “uses it against her” and denied her a promotion, telling her that it is best
to stay working as a CSR. “[Management] used their own bias to determine my career goals. I
am more than capable and have shown that I can do assigned work [above] my grade level.”
Complainant alleges that Management intentionally kept her stagnant in her current position,
despite her expanded responsibilities, as punishment for her use of disability-related leave.
Complainant contends that Management pressured her not to use so much leave, and her
absences allegedly fostered resentment among her colleagues, as Management refused to
reassign Complainant’s paperwork processing duties when she was away.

During the relevant time frame, Complainant had two first level supervisors (“Supervisor 1” and
“Supervisor 2”). Both worked as Operations Supervisors, GS-12, at the Newburgh FO.
Complainant disclosed her disabilities to both supervisors on multiple occasions. Notably,
Supervisor 1, who was responsible for approving Complainant’s FMLA requests, who had
worked with Complainant since 2013 and supervised her since 2016, testified in the record that
he was unaware that Complainant had a disability, but was aware that she had appointments
related to her child with a disability.

From August 2016 through December 2019, Complainant reported to Supervisor 1 (physical
disability, amputee). In or around June 2018, the Newburgh FO Director instructed Supervisor 1
to be the point of contact for all of Complainant’s disability accommodation and FMLA requests
after Complainant’s second level supervisor (“Former Supervisor”) allegedly made disparaging
comments about Complainant’s ability to complete her goals in light of her disabilities. 5 In or
around January 2020, Supervisor 1 was promoted to a position outside Complainant’s
supervisory chain, but he remained the point of contact regarding her reasonable accommodation
request.

From January 2020 through the remainder of the relevant time period, Complainant reported to
Supervisor 2 (no disability). Supervisor 2 testified that she was made aware that Complainant
had “back issues” when she started working at the Newburgh FO in 2017.


5
    This claim was addressed separately in an administrative grievance.
                                                5                                    2021003393

She said she understood that Complainant experiences “a great deal of pain,” but states that she
has not seen any medical evidence of Complainant’s disabilities. Supervisor 2 recounted that
Complainant was capable of working from home and completed her assignments on time. She
was not involved in the interactive process or decision-making related to Complainant’s
reasonable accommodation request.

On December 6, 2019, per Supervisor 1’s suggestion, Complainant submitted the following
reasonable accommodation requests through the Agency’s online reasonable accommodation
portal: (1) leave without pay (“LWOP”), (2) a medical needs chair for her official duty station
(“ODS”), (3) fulltime telework, (4) equipment (specialized desk, ergonomic keyboard, and a
specialized chair) for her alternate duty station (“ADS”), and (5) use of flex time for one
additional 15-minute break. For disability type, she selected “mobility, orthopedic/osteo-
arthritis, other” and under justification she wrote: “I have Sacrococcygeal disorder and lumbar
disc disorder. This is affecting my ability walking and making prolonged sitting with work and
driving activity very difficult.”

To support her request, Complainant provided a December 5, 2019 doctor’s note from her
Physical Therapist stating the driving exacerbated Complainant’s pain. Supervisor 1 was already
on notice that Complainant’s back condition was permanent because he reviewed Complainant’s
medical records submitted in support of her FMLA requests. For the December 6, 2019
reasonable accommodation, Complainant offered further supporting detail by, stating that she
could not lift over 10 pounds, sitting for prolonged periods caused her legs to give out, and she
experienced pain on a daily basis. Complainant estimated that she experienced about three
episodes pain per month so severe she is rendered unable to sit, bend, walk more than a few feet,
or stand for any length of time. Complainant stated that during an episode she required assistance
getting up and used a cane.

Supervisor 1 recalls that after he received notice from the accommodation portal, he engaged
Complainant in the interactive process (dates not specified). Supervisor 1 reviewed
Complainant’s medical documentation and determined that it did not support fulltime telework.
Supervisor 1 pointed out that Complainant’s workload included face to face interviewing and
paperwork that required her physical presence in the office. Supervisor 1 said he would have
approved a request for using flextime for an additional break, but he and Complainant never
discussed it as an option. Supervisor 1 also reasoned that fulltime telework was not warranted
because Complainant also already used LWOP as part of her approved FMLA and been provided
with an ergonomic desk at her ODS, which she did not use because she preferred to work in
reception. Supervisor 1 issued a recommendation to deny Complainant’s request and referred the
matter to the NRAC in Agency Headquarters.

Complainant alleges that she anticipated that Supervisor 1 would deny her request based on her
past interactions with him and other Management. Therefore, on the advice of her Union
Representative, Complainant also sought Work at Home by Exception (“WAHBE”) full time
telework for “up to 6 months” as permitted under the Collective Bargaining Agreement (“CBA”)
between the Union and the Agency. Complainant submitted a note from her Physical Therapist
                                                6                                    2021003393

dated December 18, 2019 stating: “the above patient is being treated for tailbone pain. Driving
exacerbates her pain, may benefit from working at home.”

On December 18, 2019, Complainant was approved for 6 months WAHBE to “avoid
exacerbation of your condition and allow healing time for your back disorders.” Complainant
was scheduled to work from home under WAHBE 4 hours a day on Mondays, Tuesdays and
Wednesdays. The remaining hours of her shift, and on Thursdays and Fridays, Complainant took
Leave Without Pay (“LWOP”) through FMLA.

On December 20, 2019, a Center for Accommodations and Disability Services (“CADS”)
Analyst provided Complainant with instructions for requesting a medical needs chair for her
ODS (Request 2). Complainant opted not to pursue her request further until she learned whether
she was approved to telework fulltime.

In February 2020, in response to the CADS Analyst’s request for additional documentation,
Complainant provided progress notes from seven physical therapy appointments between
November 20, 2019 and January 15, 2020, containing Complainant’s diagnosis of chronic
Sacrococcygeal disorders. Each appointment summary includes descriptions of pain consistent
with Complainant’s account. In a December 5, 2019 progress summary, Physical Therapist
stated, “increased sitting and driving activity creating more symptoms with more difficulty
walking.” The summary for their initial November 20, 2019 visit, included, among other things,
“difficulty getting upright after driving activity.”

Complainant included progress notes from her treating physician from June 17, 2019 through
December 31, 2019, describing Complainant’s chronic neck pain, and her sacrococcygeal
disorders, stating that “sitting, standing, and walking” were “aggravating factors” for
Complainant’s pain. Complainant included progress notes dated August 18, 2017 through April
4, 2019, from her prior physician regarding her low back pain. Physician described
Complainant’s chronic pain, neck stiffness, prior diagnoses, including lumbar disc degeneration,
cervical spondylosis, cervical radiculopathy and insomnia. The notes establish that “sitting for a
period of time triggers pain,” and that giving birth in January 2019 increased Complainant’s back
pain.

Complainant also provided progress notes from her Neurologist from November 11, 2015
through July 24, 2017, accompanied by the results of an MRI exam conducted in 2015. Based on
the MRI, the Neurologist diagnosed Complainant with multiple spinal issues, including but not
limited to several bulging disks and, for C7-T1 (vertebra in neck) “severe right and moderate left
foraminal stenosis by [small joints on either side cervical discs] hypertrophy.” Complainant had
lumbar surgery in November 2015.

On February 11, 2020, the CADS Analyst emailed Complainant, explaining that the
documentation to support her reasonable accommodation request must include the “extent of the
limitations and recommended accommodations including how the [reasonable accommodation]
will assist performing the essential functions of the job.”
                                                7                                     2021003393

Complainant responded on February 13, 2020: “I’m requesting to withdraw my claim for an
ergonomic keyboard. And focus on an ergonomic chair and telework by exception on a
permanent basis. Additionally [I am] asking if telework is approved, that I have the availability
to use it as needed. I have my days. Some days worse than others.”

On March 12, 2020, Complainant submitted a note from her Physical Therapist to the CADS
Analyst. The note recounts that Physical Therapist had been treating Complainant for
Sacrococcygeal disorder and lumbar disc disorder since November 20, 2019. Physical Therapist
observed that since starting WAHBE, Complainant “improved significantly” with her walking
and sitting abilities. The note cautioned:

       a return to prior driving and prolonged sitting at work in a poor ergonomic
       environment could set her back. She continues to gain trunk strength and control
       following pregnancy and will continue to benefit from skilled care to advance
       body mechanics training. I recommend that she be allowed to continue to work
       from home for three to six months to avoid exacerbation of her condition. In
       addition, supplying her with a proper chair and ergonomic desk when she does
       return to work are essential for her well-being and would greatly improve her
       productivity. [Emphasis added].

On March 4 and 5, 2020 the CADS Analyst interviewed Complainant. For Request 3 (fulltime
telework). Complainant told the CADS Analyst that telework “will help her walk, help her with
her workload, and help with the commute or drive home.” According to the CADS Analyst’s
notes, Complainant explained that she needed telework “for a long time and pregnancy made her
conditions worse,” and that her chronic back pain made traveling difficult. She described getting
into the car and the 15-minute drive to the Newburgh FO as “a challenge.” “While 15-minutes
may not seem far,” Complainant explained, “when her back is out, that is a lot.” Complainant
states she would stop to take a break if she had to drive for longer than 10 minutes. She rests a
lot, does breathing exercises, and does not move much at home. She goes to physical therapy
twice a week. After physical therapy sessions, Complainant also experiences “a lot of” muscle
spasms, and the commute to physical therapy itself causes her pain.

Complainant also told the CADS Analyst that she “is claustrophobic, she cannot take the
elevator, and walks two flights of stairs to her workspace. She can sit at her desk for 40 minutes
at a time.” Complainant told the CADS Analyst that coworkers sometimes helped her walk to her
desk and with her workloads, and that when her back is out, she uses a cane to walk.
Complainant asserted that she did not know why the Agency gave her a “hard time” about
telework, “90% of her job is answering the SSA general phone line, which she can do at home.
As she does not interact face to face with customers, there is no other aspect of her position that
she cannot do from home.” Complainant conceded that sometimes she was assigned to work at
the front desk.
                                               8                                    2021003393

On March 6, 2020, the CADS Analyst interviewed Supervisor 1, For Request 3, Supervisor 1
reiterated his belief to the CADS Analyst that Complainant’s request for full time telework as a
reasonable accommodation was not supported by medical documents and should be denied. He
told the CADS Analyst that Complainant was capable of driving to her medical appointments,
she could drive to the office when she needed to get her laptop updated, and (on an unspecified
date) he witnessed Complainant and her children at the funeral of a coworker’s family member.
Supervisor 1 stated that the funeral venue was about 9.5 miles from Complainant’s home (a 15 to
25-minute drive). Additionally, Supervisor 1 recalled that Complainant walks 3 flights of stairs
to get to her office. Supervisor 1 said that Complainant never informed him of her claustrophobia
in elevators, only that she “did not like” them. Supervisor 1 never observed Complainant use a
cane and did not recall seeing coworkers assist her during her pregnancy. He also asserted that
Complainant’s duties required her presence in the office.

Although Complainant already had an established part-time telework schedule, Supervisor 1 did
not appear to directly address Request 4 (ergonomic office equipment for her ADS). Rather, he
noted that Complainant was provided with a chair for her ODS, but she did not use it. For
Request 5, Supervisor 1 stated that he was not aware of Complainant’s requests for breaks, as she
never brought it to his attention, and said he would be willing to try three 10-minute breaks.

The CADS Analyst submitted her interview notes and a summary to the NRAC. In a summary
entitled “recommended denial,” the CADS Analyst states that “Complainant was diagnosed with
her disabilities in 2010, the condition is long-term, and she has taken leave for two weeks at a
time to address her condition.” [Emphasis added]. The CADS Analyst recounts that
Complainant’s most recent pregnancy and delivery in 2019 caused “a lot of back pain” and
“really pushed out her tailbone.” The CADS Analyst also recounts that Complainant
“experiences back pain on a daily basis at a level 6 out of 10,” and Complainant said that she
would “work through her neck pain and back pain.”

With respect to Request 3 (fulltime telework), the CADS Analyst emphasized that
Complainant’s commute was 10.2 miles, a 15-minute drive, and that Complainant acknowledged
that her home was “very close” to work. Also, Complainant’s husband would often drive
Complainant to work, leaving her car there. The CADS Analyst recounted that Complainant
regularly drove short distances (under 10 minutes) to doctor appointments and to drop off her
daughter at school. Complainant told the CADS Analyst that if she could telework full time, she
would be more stationary, she would not have any pressure or embarrassment about her
disabilities from Management, and she could take breaks and sit in her comfortable chair. At
home, she could focus on working without interruptions and “modify her pain.” She notes that
she walks 150 feet to her Manager’s office and walking to the FEI is another 150 feet, and these
distances are “a lot on her body.”

Regarding Request 4 (ergonomic chair and desk at ADS) the CADS Analyst recounts that
Complainant could already telework comfortably from her ADS, as she had a chair at home with
pillows and a donut. Complainant acknowledged she was provided with instructions for
requesting ergonomic equipment.
                                                9                                    2021003393

For Request 5 (use of flex time for an additional 15 minute break) the CADS Analyst indicated
that Supervisor 1 would consider an additional break, but it was not supported by Complainant’s
medical documentation.

On April 17, 2020, the Agency’s National Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator (“NRAC”
or “Accommodation Coordinator”), issued a letter formally denying Complainant’s December 6,
2019 request. The Agency denied requests 3, 4, and 5. The NRAC determined that Complainant
already received LWOP (Request 1) and withdrew Request 2.

The Denial Letter lists the medical documents Complainant provided to the CADS Analyst, and
summarized Complainant and Supervisor 1’s interviews with the CADS Analyst. Among other
things, the Denial Letter recounted that “local management” told the CADS Analyst that
Complainant was on WAHBE until June 18, 2020, and that her request for LWOP as an
accommodation had been granted. “Local Management” also informed the CADS Analyst that
Complainant had visited the office on nonwork days (dates, frequency and duration of these
visits not specified), thereby “suggesting that commuting to your ODS is possible.”

The NRAC denied Request 4 (ADS equipment) because the medical documentation
Complainant provided “is insufficient to establish that a specialized chair is necessary to enable
you to perform your essential job functions.” Alternatively, the Agency stated that Complainant
withdrew her request for a specialized desk, Complainant told the CADS Analyst that she had a
comfortable chair at home that she set up with pillows and a donut cushion. The NRAC denied
Request 5 (an additional 15-minute break) because the medical documentation Complainant
provided “does not mention anything about the need for an additional break or explain how this
request will alleviate your symptoms.” With respect to Request 3 (fulltime telework), the NRAC
concludes that Complainant was provided with an “effective accommodation” to enable
Complainant to perform the essential functions of her CSR position by granting “liberal use of
your accrued leave when you are unable to work due to your medical condition and when you
need to attend your medical appointments. The Agency has also granted LWOP for you to care
for yourself and family.” The Agency also noted that Complainant was on WAHBE until June
18, 2020 “consistent with [Physical Therapist’s] recommendation.” The NRAC stated that she
based her decision in part on Supervisor 1’s recommendations to deny Complainant’s requests.

The Denial Letter specified that the denial of telework would not take effect until after the
Covid-19 telework was lifted. According to Complainant, had it not been from the mandatory
work from home order, she could not have reasonably performed the full scope of her work once
her WAHBE period ended on June 18, 2020.
                                                10                                    2021003393

Non-Selection

On or about March 1, 2019, Complainant applied for the Claims Specialist position at issue in
Complaint 2 via USAJobs.gov. A Human Resources (“HR”) Specialist, GS-13, (Black/African
American) in the Agency’s New York Regional Office, who was responsible for filling the
position, recalled that the Agency received “many applications” as it was a publicly advertised,
external recruitment. HR Specialist also clarified that only two openings were available: one in
Poughkeepsie and one in Westchester County (also referenced in the record as “New Rochelle
FO”). HR Specialist compiled a “Best Qualified List” of 22 candidates including Complainant
and forwarded it to the Area Director for the New York Region to conduct the “prequalification
process.” HR Specialist characterized the prequalification process as “behaviorally based” and
explained that the results were used to rank the candidates for purpose of selecting them for a
panel interview.

The Office of the Area Director divided the candidates on the Best Qualified List among various
management officials at different field offices. The management officials completed the
“prequalification process” by contacting references and conducting a prequalification interview
with each candidate. The prequalification interview and the panel interview were comprised of
the same questions, which were based on a Competency Assessment Interviewing Process
(“CAIP”) specific to the Claims Specialist position. The Panel scored each response from 1 to 7,
the total score is added, and that number is used to order the list of candidates.

On or about April 5, 2019, the District Manager for West Nyack, GS-14, (Caucasian)
(“Interviewer”) contacted Complainant to initiate the prequalification process. Complainant
emailed a list of three references to Interviewer. First on the list was Complainant’s second level
supervisor from 2016 through March 15, 2019 (white) (“Former Supervisor”), who was named
in several of Complainant’s past EEO complaints and had just been promoted to the position of
Deputy Area Director for the New York Region, GS-14. Former Supervisor stated on the
reference form that Complainant was “still growing as a CSR.” When asked if she would re-hire
Complainant, Former Supervisor responded, “only as a CSR.”

On April 10, 2019, Interviewer completed the pre-interview with complainant. According to
Complainant, another of her professional references, a colleague, told her that she was contacted
by Interviewer, and Interviewer expressed that she had a positive impression of Complainant. On
April 17, 2019, Complainant completed the panel interview, which she believed went well.

On or about July 8, 2019, Complainant learned that she was not selected for the Claims
Specialist Position. She attributed the nonselection to the negative feedback that Management
provided to Interviewer during the prequalification process.

The Selecting Official for the Claims Specialist position was the District Manager (New
Rochelle), GS-14, (American of Puerto Rican descent). According to Selecting Official,
Complainant was not selected for the position because she scored lower on the CAIP interview
than the selectees.
                                                11                                     2021003393

HR Specialist testified that she did not provide the pre-qualification interview and reference
documents to Selecting Official, however, “[Selecting Official] may nonetheless have considered
the candidates' pre-qualification interview materials in evaluating the candidates.” Selecting
Official does not recall reviewing the pre-qualification materials and explains that he selected the
candidates who scored highest on the panel interview. Both selectees were veterans (one had a
10-point preference, and one had a 5-point preference), which impacted their overall scores.
Selecting Official testifies that he was not aware of Complainant’s protected bases, he had no
organizational relationship with Complainant, and he was not involved in Complainant’s prior
EEO activity.

Final Agency Decision

The investigation for Complaint 1 concluded on October 28, 2020, and the investigation for
Complaint 2 concluded on December 15, 2020. For reasons unspecified, the Agency did not
provide Complainant with the reports of investigation (“ROI”) and notice of her right to request
either a FAD or a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (“AJ”) until February 19, 2021.
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), so the Agency issued a FAD pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). 6

The FAD concluded that Complainant failed to prove discrimination as alleged. The instant
appeal followed. On May 24, 2021, Complainant filed an “Amended Appeal Brief” in support of
her appeal, and the Agency timely responded with an “Agency’s Memorandum in Opposition to
Appellant’s Appeal” on June 22, 2021.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complaint 1 – Reasonable Accommodation

Complainant contends that the Agency improperly denied her request for a reasonable
accommodation of fulltime telework, so that she can treat her back condition. She further
contends that the Agency overlooked testimony from Supervisor 2 confirming that Complainant
could perform her job duties while teleworking, and notes that she has successfully teleworked
full time since December 19, 2019. According to Complainant, had it not been for the mandatory
work from home order due to COVID-19, she could not perform the full scope of her work
without requesting another reasonable accommodation.



6
  On January 10, 2022, Complainant, noting that the Commission had yet to issue an appellate
decision on Complaints 1 and 2, asked the Commission to consolidate both complaints with
Agency No. NY-21-0329-SSA (filed June 17, 2021), which was pending a hearing before an
EEOC AJ. The Commission acknowledges and apologizes for Complainant’s lengthy wait for a
decision on Complaints 1 and 2. As Complainant already waived her right to a hearing and a
FAD has been issued on both complaints, Complaints 1 and 2 are at the appellate stage of
processing and therefore cannot be reviewed in a hearing before an AJ.
                                               12                                    2021003393

Complainant also maintains that Supervisor 1 was aware of her disability, and that sitting for
prolonged periods impacted her mobility, yet he denied her request for a reasonable
accommodation without offering an alternative. She notes that Supervisor 1 stated in the record
that he would have approved additional breaks as an accommodation yet did not discuss it with
her.

The Agency contends that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case for denial of
reasonable accommodation because Complainant’s medical documents did not show how her
disability impacted her ability to perform the essential functions of her position, nor did it
explain how the requested accommodation would be effective in that regard. The Agency further
contends that it already provided Complainant with “liberal use of leave to use as an
accommodation, as well as the use of leave without pay as an accommodation.” The Agency also
characterizes its decision to grant Complainant’s December 19, 2019 request for work at home
by exception as a reasonable accommodation. The Agency notes that due to Covid-19,
Complainant has continued to telework full time, but contends that Complainant has not shown
that she needs to telework in order to perform her job duties. The Agency denies Complainant’s
claim that Supervisor 1 was biased and caused the denial of reasonable accommodation,
reasoning that the NRAC is the only Agency employee who can make a determination on a
reasonable accommodation request.

Complaint 2 – Nonselection

Complainant contends that the FAD is based on contradictory and inconsistent witness
statements, and that the Commission must evaluate witness credibility before reaching a
decision. She contends that Former Supervisor’s negative reference is contradicted by
Complainant’s performance reviews and Supervisor 2’s testimony. Complainant also contends
that the FAD failed to address witness testimony that Complainant already performed Claims
Specialist work.

The Agency contends that Complainant’s performance reviews and witness testimony about her
responsibilities are not relevant because, “this vacancy was filled solely on the basis of the
performance in the interview, and the veterans’ preferences.” The Agency contends that the
FAD properly found that it provided legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
Namely, the selectees “were ranked higher on the numeric listing of qualified candidates because
they were veterans,” and Complainant “simply did not do as well on the interview as the
selectees had.” The Agency further contends that Complainant cannot show pretext, as she
“failed to show that her qualifications were plainly superior and has pointed to no other evidence
that could support a finding of pretext.” The Agency contends that Complainant is not entitled to
a credibility determination because she did not request a hearing.
                                                13                                    2021003393

Hostile Work Environment

Complainant contends that the FAD failed to address her hostile work environment claim, but
does not identify specific claims or events. Rather, she lists the management officials involved in
her EEO activity and contends that she must discuss her career development with various
management officials while participating in multiple EEO actions naming them.

The Agency contends that it is “not clear to what Appellant is referring to with this argument.”
The Agency alternately contends that “a hostile work environment was never an accepted issue,”
citing its September 23, 2020 Letter of Acceptance for Complaint 2. The Agency also states that
Complainant raised an April 2020 allegation of harassment that occurred 2011 and 2013, which
it contends were properly dismissed as untimely raised with an EEO Counselor. In a footnote,
the Agency obliquely references Complainant’s other allegations of harassment, stating,
“Appellant filed numerous extraneous documents along with her appeal….Complainant has
made no affirmative showing that the other documents she filed were ‘new and material.’
Accordingly, the Commission should not consider her other documents.”

                                   STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part
1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and
its interpretation of the law”).

                                           ANALYSIS

Witness Credibility

The regulation provided under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires an agency to create an impartial
and appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised by the written
complaint. An “appropriate factual record” is “one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw
conclusions as to whether discrimination occurred.” § 1614.108(b). Upon receipt of the ROI,
complainants are provided an opportunity to cure defects in the record by either notifying the
agency (in writing) of any perceived deficiencies in the investigation or requesting a hearing
before an AJ. See EEO MD-110, at Ch. 6, § XI and Ch. 7, § I.

On appeal, Complainant argues that a hearing is necessary because questions of witness
credibility exist for both ROIs. Complainant does not dispute that she received notice of her
right to request a hearing before an AJ.
                                               14                                   2021003393

Therefore, Complainant waived her right to cure the perceived defects in the investigation
through the hearing process when she failed to timely respond. If Complainant wanted an
opportunity to develop the record through discovery and cross examination of witnesses, she
should have timely requested a hearing before an AJ. Tommy O. v. United States Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120152090 (Jun. 8, 2017).

Hostile Work Environment Harassment Claim

Throughout the investigative record, and Complainant dedicates much of her argument to
allegations of harassment ranging from instances that involved the same management officials
and occurred around the same time as the events in the instant complaint, to incidents that
occurred as early as December 2011. We have thoroughly reviewed the administrative record,
and, as they were referenced by both Complainant and the Agency, past EEOC matters raised by
Complainant with this Commission. We conclude that the Agency’s exclusion of Complainant’s
harassment allegations in its FAD was appropriate.

In January 2017, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint (identified as Agency No.
NY20170075SSA) alleging a single accepted claim of discriminatory non-selection. The matter
was investigated, and Complainant requested a hearing. Complainant subsequently filed a
number of motions in an effort to re-frame her January 2017 Complaint as an ongoing
harassment/hostile work environment claim and included additional instances of nonselection.

In a June 9, 2020 “Case Management Order,” the assigned EEOC AJ denied Complainant’s
“Motion for Reconsideration of Dismissals Addressed in April 13, 2017 Decision,” “Motion to
Consolidate” and “Motion to Amend Summary of Claims and Remedy,” all filed on September
27, 2018. The AJ found that the claims these Motions sought to include were all untimely,
already raised in a separate proceeding, and/or fell outside the scope of the January 2017
Complaint. However, the AJ determined that Complainant’s July 28, 2019 “Motion to Amend
Claim to Consolidate New Instance of Discrimination,” alleging discriminatory nonselection on
July 8, 2019, contained a new claim of discrimination. The AJ recounted that Complainant
initially raised the July 8, 2019 non-selection with an EEO Counselor on July 12, 2019, who then
advised her to request consolidation with January 2017 complaint. The AJ denied the request to
consolidate but ordered the Agency “to commence processing the new claims as a separate EEO
complaint, using the filing date of the motion to amend as the date used to determine if
Complainant's initial contact was timely.” The AJ also instructed the Agency to calculate
timeliness based on September 27, 2018, the date of Complainant’s denied motions. The
Agency subsequently notified Complainant of her right to file a formal EEO complaint pursuant
to the AJ’s Case Management Order.

On August 14, 2020, Complaint 2 (at issue in this appeal) written in narrative format, containing
the July 8, 2019 non-selection, all of the claims from her September 27, 2018 Motions and
several more recent instances of alleged harassment (referenced above as “Claims a, b, and c”).
                                               15                                    2021003393

On September 23, 2020, the Agency issued a Notice of Acceptance for Complaint 2. The only
claim listed was the July 8, 2019 nonselection. The Notice of Acceptance obliquely addresses
most of Complainant’s harassment allegations in a footnote explaining that the AJ denied the
majority of Complainant’s September 27, 2018 motions. The footnote further explains that based
on the AJ’s instructions, Complainant’s only new claim was the July 8, 2019 nonselection
stating, “it is unclear where the judge obtained the September date to determine timeliness of the
non-selection claim.”

The Agency’s decision not to articulate Complainant’s harassment claims from her August 14,
2020 formal complaint was appropriate to the extent that those claims were previously raised in
her September 27, 2018 motions. The AJ’s June 9, 2020 Case Management Order provided
ample explanation for why these claims could not be included in an EEO complaint. The
Agency’s failure to articulate Complainant’s additional harassment claims (“Claims a, b, and c”)
amounts to a harmless error. 7 Unlike the accepted claim in Complaint 2 (the July 8, 2019 non-
selection), Claims a, b, and c were not raised with an EEO Counselor prior to Complainant
including them in her August 14, 2020 formal EEO complaint.

The regulation set forth at 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2) states, in pertinent part, that an agency
shall dismiss a complaint which raises a matter that has not been brought to the attention of an
EEO Counselor and is not like or related to a matter on which the complainant has received
counseling. A later claim or compliant is "like or related" to the original complaint if the later
claim or compliant adds to or clarifies the original complaint and could have reasonably been
expected to grow out of the original compliant during the investigation. See Hurlocker v. Dep’t
of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120141346 (June 27, 2014); referencing Scher v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05940702 (May 30, 1995); Calhoun v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC
Request No. 05891068 (Mar. 8, 1990)

The allegations in Claims a and b are not “like and related” to the July 8, 2019 non-selection, as
the management official had no involvement in the selection process. The allegation in Claim c
also does not concern matters “like and related” to Complainant’s nonselection. Further, Claim c
lacks the necessary specificity to state a claim. See, e.g. Carlan v. Dep’t of the Treas., EEOC
Appeal No. 01A32447 (Aug. 1, 2003) (finding failure to state a claim due to lack of specificity
where “Complainant has not identified when the events occurred, what happened, how she was
directly disadvantaged, or how these matters altered the terms, conditions, or privileges of her
employment.”) Therefore, even though Complainant consistently alleged harassment throughout
the record, the FAD’s failure to address these allegations was proper.

This decision shall not be construed as a finding that Complainant was or was not subject to a
hostile work environment. We emphasize to Complainant that the matter of hostile work
environment is not at issue in this complaint.


7
 In the legal context the term “harmless error” refers to an error “whose existence has no impact
on the outcome of the case.” See Hines v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05960667
(Mar. 26, 1998).
                                                16                                     2021003393

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation

An agency is required to make reasonable accommodation to the known physical and mental
limitations of an individual with a disability unless the agency can show that accommodation
would cause an undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o) and (p). In order to establish that she
was denied a reasonable accommodation, Complainant must show that: (1) she is an individual
with a disability as defined by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g); (2) she is “qualified” as defined by 29
C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); and (3) the Agency failed to provide a reasonable accommodation. See
EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the
Americans with Disabilities Act (Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation), No.
915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002).

The Agency concedes that Complainant meets the criteria for prongs (1) and (2) but argues that it
did not deny Complainant a reasonable accommodation, as is required under prong (3). Rather,
the NRAC concluded that the Agency either already provided Complainant with sufficient
alternative reasonable accommodations, or Complainant did not need the requested
accommodations.

A reasonable accommodation is an adjustment or change at work for a reason related to a
medical condition. See Bryan R. v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120130020
(Mar. 20, 2015), citing EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and
Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act, No. 915.002 (“EEOC Guidance No.
915.002”), Question 1 (Oct. 17, 2002). After receiving a request for reasonable accommodation,
the employer should engage in the “interactive process,” which is an informal process with the
requesting individual to clarify their needs and identify the appropriate reasonable
accommodation. See EEOC Guidance No. 915.002, see also, Abeijon v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 0120080156 (Aug. 8, 2012). We note that protected individuals are
entitled to reasonable accommodations, but they are not necessarily entitled to their
accommodation of choice. Castaneda v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01931005
(Feb. 17, 1994).

The following accommodations are at issue: (3) fulltime telework, (4) specialized chair and
specialized desk for Complainant’s alternate duty station (“ADS”), and (5) use of flex time for
one additional 15-minute break. The NRAC formally denied all three requests on April 17, 2020,
but clarified that the decision for request (3) fulltime telework would not go into effect until the
mandatory COVID-19 telework order was rescinded. The COVID-19 telework order remained
in effect for the duration of the relevant time frame.
                                               17                                   2021003393

       Request 3

An employer may deny an employee's request to telework if it can show that an alternative
accommodation would be effective or that telework would cause an undue hardship. See
Fernanda H. v. Social Sec. Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 2020004066 (Dec. 21, 2021),
Enforcement Guidance, at Question 34. The Agency has a burden of production to show that
there is an effective alternative accommodation. Id.

Significantly, in this instance, Complainant was not offered an alternative reasonable
accommodation. In the Report of Investigation, the EEO Investigator asked Supervisor 1 and
NRAC whether Complainant was offered an alternative reasonable accommodation. Supervisor
1 responded “I am not sure,” and NRAC left the response space blank. NRAC wrote “not
applicable” in response to the follow-up question asking why no alternative accommodation was
offered. Additionally, the record contradicts the Agency’s contentions that it provided
Complainant with Work at Home by Exception (“WAHBE”), Leave Without Pay (“LWOP”),
and “Liberal Leave” as alternative reasonable accommodations. Complainant obtained WAHBE,
not an accommodation and available to all employees, through her Union because Supervisor 1
recommended denying Complainant’s request for telework as a reasonable accommodation.
Likewise, Complainant was not “granted” LWOP or Liberal Leave as a reasonable
accommodation. Complainant was authorized under the Family & Medical Leave Act (“FLMA”)
to take leave (including LWOP) related to her disability or to care for her son. According to the
CADS Analyst’s notes, Supervisor 1 confirmed that Complainant obtained liberal leave outside
the reasonable accommodation process. The Commission is also unconvinced by the rationale,
set forth in the NRAC’s Denial Letter, that none of the medical documentation Complainant
provided (all of which identified prolonged sitting and standing as sources of her chronic pain)
expressly precluded Complainant from taking alternate forms of transportation to commute to
work.

Even if the Agency’s provision of LWOP and Liberal Leave was provided as an accommodation,
these options are neither “reasonable” nor “effective” in instances where Complainant could
have worked had she been granted telework as an accommodation. See Denese G. v. Dep’t of
the Treas., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141118 (Dec. 29, 2016) (forcing an employee to take leave
when another accommodation would permit the employee to continue working is not an
“effective” accommodation and may evince a failure by the agency to act in good faith). In other
words, to the extent that Complainant was forced to take leave when she could have teleworked,
she was denied a reasonable accommodation.

Based on the evidence of record, Complainant’s physical presence at the Newburgh FO was not
necessary for her to perform the essential functions of the CSR position. The Position
Description (“PD”) for a CSR, GS-8, supports Complainant’s assertion that the majority of her
duties consist of interactions with customers over the phone, which she could do from home.
When asked about Complainant’s specific duties, Supervisor 1 simply referred to the CSR PD.
Supervisor 2 responded “[Complainant] must answer phones from 9am to the time she leaves, or
until our phone lines shut off (4 pm).”
                                                  18                                2021003393

Complainant’s other duties included entering or reviewing data using Agency software. While
some of this work involved processing paper documents, this appeared to be a minor
responsibility as Supervisor 2 characterized this as occurring on her “off time” from her primary
telephone duties. Notably, Complainant’s performance appraisals for 2017, 2018 and 2020, 8 do
not discuss any job responsibilities involving face to face interaction with the public.

Complainant’s 2020 Mid-Year Review, which she and Supervisor 2 signed on June 5, 2020,
reflects that she can successfully complete the essential functions of her position while
teleworking full-time as she was on WAHBE, and that recent updates to Field Office processes
have made the CSR position more conducive to telework. The June 5, 2020 review
acknowledges that Complainant was on WAHBE for the duration of the rating period: “You
continue to produce a fair share of work according to management expectations…..You continue
to keep the general line open and answer calls continuously… provide quality customer
support…[and] timely complete your assignments.” Complainant’s performance feedback is
consistent with her 2017 and 2018 appraisals, prior to her WAHBE.

While further medical documentation is necessary to establish that Complainant requires
permanent fulltime telework, the Agency erred by outright denying any telework as a reasonable
accommodation. Again, we reject the Agency’s position that Complainant could use leave as a
reasonable accommodation because leave where a complainant is capable of working if provided
an accommodation is not “reasonable” or “effective.” In light of Complainant’s medical
documentation supporting fulltime telework as a reasonable accommodation, the Agency could
have offered Complainant an alternative accommodation without denying telework. Specifically,
the Agency could have provided Complainant with telework as needed. In her February 13, 2020
response to the CADS Analyst, Complainant indicated that she would be amenable to this.
Alternatively, the Agency could have allowed fulltime telework as an interim accommodation,
pending medical documentation supporting the need for fulltime telework as a permanent
reasonable accommodation.

The Agency improperly denied Request 3 by denying the full-time telework request or failing to
offer an effective alternative reasonable accommodation.

         Requests 4 and 5

For Request 4, Complainant confirmed that she withdrew her request for an ergonomic keyboard
at her Alternate Duty Station (“ADS”) but reiterated that she sought a specialized chair and
specialized desk at her ADS in the February 13, 2020 email. In her accommodation Request,
Complainant stated that her therapist advised her to use a kneeling chair because “[Complainant]
a lot of alignment problems on the left side of her body.” For Request 5, Complainant explained
that she sought an additional 15-minute break (using flex time) because, if she sat for a
prolonged period time (approximately 40 minutes or more), she would have difficulty getting up
and walking afterward.


8
    Complainant was on maternity leave in 2019.
                                               19                                    2021003393

We are baffled by the NRAC’s denial of Requests 4 and 5. Complainant’s PD establishes that the
nature of her duties require prolonged sitting at a desk. Both before and after the CADS
Analyst’s request, Complainant provided ample supporting medical documentation establishing
that she could not sit for prolonged periods of time without impacting her mobility and causing
severe pain. For Request 5, the reason for Complainant’s request for an additional break is
“known or obvious.” See Dixie B. The additional break would mitigate the “prolonged” sitting
required for Complainant to perform the essential functions of her position. For Request 4,
Complainant’s “known or obvious” disability is sufficient to support a request for an ergonomic
chair and desk for her ADS Moreover, in the March 12, 2020 note, Physical Therapist
recommended providing Complainant with an ergonomic office equipment. Simply because
Complainant found a way to make do by using pillows on a chair at home does not absolve the
Agency from its obligation to accommodate her. Assuming, NRAC correctly concluded
Complainant opted not to pursue the CADS Analyst’s instructions on how to request ergonomic
equipment, it is still erroneous to deny the option due to lack of medical support.

The Agency improperly denied Requests 4 and 5.

Disparate Treatment – Non-Selection

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim such as this, a complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411
U.S. 792 (1973). First, the complainant must establish a prima facie case by presenting facts that
if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411
U.S. at 802; Furnco Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). Proof of a prima facie
case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802
n. 13. The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for its actions. Texas Dep’t. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To
ultimately prevail, the complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency's explanation is pretextual (i.e. the Agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason).
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000), St. Mary’s Honor Ctr.
v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502 (1993).

In the non-selection context, a complainant may establish a prima facie case by showing that: (1)
they are a member of a protected class and/or they engaged in protected EEO activity, (2) they
were qualified for the position, (3) they were not selected for the position, and (4) they were
accorded treatment different from that given to persons otherwise similarly situated who are
members outside of the complainant’s protected group. EEOC Enforcement Guidance
on O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Sept. 18,
1996); Williams v. Dep't of Educ., EEOC Request No. 05970561 (Aug. 6, 1998).

Here, without more, Complainant’s prima facie case for race discrimination is weak as one of the
two selectees was also Black/African American, and therefore not outside Complainant’s
protected group. However, it is undisputed by the Agency that Complainant established a prima
facie case for discriminatory non-selection based on disability and reprisal.
                                                20                                    2021003393

Once a complainant has established a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253. The
Supreme Court has stated that for an agency to meet this burden, it must “frame the factual issue
with sufficient clarity so that the [complainant] will have a full and fair opportunity to
demonstrate pretext.” Burdine, 450 U.S. at 255-56. Although the agency's burden of production
is not onerous, it must nevertheless provide a specific, clear, and individualized explanation for
the treatment accorded a complainant. See Lorenzo v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Request No.
05950931 (Nov. 6, 1997).

In its FAD, the Agency reasoned that Complainant was not selected for the position of Social
Insurance Specialist (Claims Specialist), GS-105-7, because Complainant’s qualifications were
not “demonstrably superior” to those of the two selectees. In the alternative, the Agency appears
to argue that Complainant’s qualifications were not relevant because it selected two other
candidates based on veterans’ preference.

In non-selection cases, the legitimate non-discriminatory reason must include a “specific, clear,
and individualized explanation” for the non-selection so that the complainant is provided with an
opportunity to prove that the agency's explanation was a pretext for discriminatory animus. See
Boston v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120042074 (May 26, 2004).
Otherwise, a complainant is not required to demonstrate pretext if they have successfully
established a prima facie case, and the agency's legitimate nondiscriminatory reason is
“so generalized, conclusory, and vaporous as to offer no substantive explanation of the Agency's
action.” See Fullman v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A31036 (May 18,
2004).

The Commission has previously held that where an agency fails to provide “specific, clear, and
individualized explanation” for why its selecting officials assigned their respective ratings or
scores to a complainant and the selectees, it fails to meet its burden of production. See Garret W.
citing Clemente v. Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0720080012 (Sept. 24, 2008), Golmski v.
United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01955157 (Jul. 17, 1997), see also Complainant v.
United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01A31036 (Mar. 18, 2004) (agency statement that
selectee was “better suited for the position” was “so generalized, conclusory and vaporous as to
offer no substantive explanation of the agency's action”), Complainant v. Dep’t of Labor, EEOC
Request No. 0520120381 (Jun. 25, 2015) (unexplained absence and inconsistent explanations
surrounding selection records, the makeup of the workplace, and the complainant's plainly
superior qualifications are cumulatively probative of pretext) citing Nita H. v. Dep’t of the
Interior, EEOC Petition No. 0320110050 (Jul. 16, 2014) (internal inconsistencies, implausibility,
or contradictions in an employer's explanation of the challenged employment decision may be
evidence of pretext for discrimination or retaliation.

Here, the Agency’s witnesses provided little explanation regarding why Complainant’s highly
relevant and lengthy experience was overcome by the selectees, who appears to have less
relevant experience.
                                                21                                     2021003393

According to the Vacancy Announcement, the Claims Specialist position entailed “speaking with
beneficiaries about their rights under the Social Security laws, gathering facts and evidence to
establish eligibility for benefits, making critical decisions to determine the amount of benefits
paid to individuals, and using state-of-the-art computer technology to access and update
information about claims.” [Emphasis added]. With eight years employed by the Agency and six
in an office primarily staffed by Claims Specialists, Complainant regularly spoke with
beneficiaries, had familiarity with the relevant laws and software, and regularly performed some
Claims Specialist responsibilities. Also, Complainant has worked at the GS-8 level for at least
several years, and the Claims Specialist position at issue is a GS-7. The Agency offers no
explanation for why the selectees, whose resumes do not reflect any experience with Social
Security law were better qualified than Complainant for the Claims Specialist position. See
Garret W. v. United States Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120173051 (October 30, 2018), the
Agency failed to meet its burden of production in a non-selection case because the selecting
official’s explanation for his scoring consisted mostly of conclusory statements, such as
“Complainant did not score as well in the hiring process as [the selectee]” and “did not address
how he determined a higher score for [the selectee’s] one year of experience in a supervisory
position as opposed to Complainant's 10 years of acting supervisory experience.”

The ranked applicant list following the CAIP Interview contained 25 names, all but Complainant
and Selectee 1 redacted. Selectee 1 received a final rating of 91 points, Complainant received a
final rating of 80 points, and Selectee 2’s final rating was not included. Notes and individual
scoring from the panel interview were not included, even though this was the alleged basis for
the candidates’ ratings. The CAIP Interview Summary Evaluations were provided in the record,
even though it is not clear whether Selecting Official considered them.

Assuming the CAIP initial interview materials were considered by Selecting Official, they lack
detail beyond a numeric score and comments from references. Each score sheet reflected 7
elements (Customer Service Orientation, Self-Management, Interpersonal Sensitivity, Planning
and Organizing, Decision Making/Judgment, Analytical Thinking/Prob Solving, and
Communications) worth up to 7 points based on references and the applicant’s initial interview.
Out of a possible total of 49 points, Complainant’s overall score was 34, Selectee 1 scored 36,
and Selectee 2 scored 37, with no explanation for the scoring. We note that Selectee 2 had one
positive reference, and one reference that characterized Selectee’s “ability to work well with
supervisors; ability to work well with peers” as “fair.” Selectee 2 originally received a score of 3
on “Interpersonal Sensitivity” but this was crossed out and changed to 7. As a result, Selectee 2
scored higher than Complainant. There is no explanation for the change, or notes explaining any
of the scores.

The Agency provides veterans’ preference as a legitimate non-discriminatory reason in addition
to interview scores. It is well established that veterans’ preference can be a legitimate
nondiscriminatory reason for non-selection. Under certain circumstances, applicants for federal
employment who are veterans are entitled to priority over other qualified candidates when filling
vacant positions.
                                               22                                  2021003393

The Commission has previously found instances where an agency selected a candidate based on
veterans’ preference points, even where their raw interview score was lower than a
complainant’s score, constituted a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for non-selection. See,
e.g. Minh W. v. Dep’t of Housing & Urban Devel., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141692 (May 27,
2016).

Nevertheless, based on the specific facts of this case, the candidates’ veteran status is not
sufficient to meet the Agency’s evidentiary burden. While HR Specialist stated, “it appears this
[veterans’ preference] happened in Complainant’s case, as the two selectees were veterans,” the
Selecting Official testified that the reason he did not select Complainant was that she scored
lower on the panel interview than the selectees. He recalled, “some of the applicants selected
were veterans” but reiterates that he chose the candidates with the highest scores. Therefore,
despite the Agency’s argument, the evidence of record does not establish that veterans’
preference played a deciding role in the selection at issue.

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including those not
specifically addressed herein, we find the Agency's evidence does not provide a specific, clear,
and individualized explanation as to why Complainant was not selected for a position for which
she was deemed qualified. Therefore, the Agency has not met its burden of production, and
Complainant's initial inference of disability and reprisal discrimination remains unrebutted.

                                        CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, we REVERSE the
Agency’s final order. We REMAND the matter back to the Agency to take corrective action in
accordance with this Decision and the order herein.

                                       ORDER (C0618)

The Agency shall take the following actions:

   1. Reasonable Accommodation. To the extent that it has not already done so, the Agency
      shall immediately engage in the interactive process with Complainant to assess her
      current reasonable accommodation needs. Complainant may need to provide updated
      medical documentation as part of the interactive process.

       The Agency shall engage in the interactive process and provide the accommodation in
       accordance with the time frames set forth in the Agency’s reasonable accommodation
       plan or within 120 calendar days, whichever time frame is shorter.

   2. Restoration of Leave. Within ninety (90) calendar days from the date this decision is
      issued, the Agency shall restore any leave (e.g. annual, sick, LWOP, FMLA)
      Complainant was forced to use due to the Agency’s failure to allow her to telework as an
      effective reasonable accommodation for her disabilities. The time frame shall begin on
      the date of Complainant’s request, December 6, 2019 through the date Complainant was
                                           23                                    2021003393

   either granted a reasonable accommodation or left the Agency. The Agency shall provide
   the Compliance Officer with a printout or statement by an appropriate agency official,
   identifying the amount and type of leave restored. If Complainant has since retired, the
   Agency shall reimburse Complainant for the amount of restored leave plus interest from
   the date of Complainant’s retirement.

       a. We recognize that Complainant’s payroll and leave records will not identify
          precisely which leave hours were taken due to denial of reasonable
          accommodation. Therefore, Complainant and the Agency shall work together to
          extrapolate a “ballpark” number of leave hours to restore, taking into
          consideration any patterns in Complainant's leave usage, emails or text
          conversations, medical records (or a signed statement from Complainant's
          physician with pertinent information) or any other available records the parties
          deem relevant. See Annie F. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Appeal No.
          2022001221 (Apr. 13, 2023) (finding denial of reasonable accommodation where
          the agency required the complainant to use leave rather than grant her disability-
          related telework requests, instructing the parties to extrapolate a “ballpark”
          number of leave hours to restore), Elise S. v. Dep’t of State, EEOC Appeal Nos.
          2020004019 & 2020004020 (Nov. 22, 2021) (analyzing appropriate methodology
          for calculating a reasonable estimate for reinstatement of leave where the
          complainant’s leave usage was impacted by denied reasonable accommodation,
          and later a change in circumstances outside the scope of the complaint). Some
          variables the parties may consider include instances where Complainant was
          explicitly denied telework, instances where Complainant needed to take leave she
          otherwise would not have taken in order to recover from days she was required to
          commute to the office, and leave taken on days adjacent to documented flareups
          of Complainant’s condition. We note that leave restoration may not be necessary
          where Complainant teleworked due to the COVID-19 pandemic, however, leave
          usage during that time frame may be compared with time Complainant was still
          required to come in to the office to compute the “ballpark” amount of leave owed.

       b. Complainant shall cooperate in the Agency's efforts to compute the amount of
          leave due and shall provide all relevant information requested by the Agency. If
          there is a dispute regarding the exact amount, the Agency shall issue a check to
          Complainant for the undisputed amount within sixty (60) calendar days of the
          date the Agency determines the amount it believes to be due. Complainant may
          petition for enforcement or clarification of the amount in dispute. The petition for
          clarification or enforcement must be filed with the Compliance Officer, at the
          address referenced in the statement entitled, “Implementation of the
          Commission's Decision.”

3. Promotion. Within sixty (60) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the
   Agency shall issue a written offer to Complainant for the position of Social Insurance
   Specialist (Claims Specialist), GS-105-7 at one of the following New York offices: (a)
                                                24                                     2021003393

        Newburgh, (b) Poughkeepsie, (c) Rockland County, and (d) Westchester County. 9 or a
        substantially equivalent position, retroactive to June 23, 2019. 10 The Agency’s offer shall
        provide Complainant with fifteen (15) calendar days from receipt of the offer to notify
        the Agency of whether she accepts or declines the offer. Failure to accept the offer within
        fifteen (15) calendar days will be considered a declination of the offer, unless
        Complainant can show that circumstances beyond her control prevented a response
        within the time limit. Any back pay liability shall cease to accrue with either the actual
        placement of Complainant into the position or with the date the offer was declined.

     4. Back Pay and Lump Sum Payment. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this
        decision is issued, the Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with
        interest, and other benefits due Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501. The
        back pay amount shall be computed in the manner prescribed by 5 C.F.R. § 550.805. The
        back pay period will assume Complainant held the position of Social Insurance Specialist
        (Claims Specialist), GS-105-7, 11 and shall begin on June 23, 2019.

            a. Complainant shall cooperate with the Agency's efforts to compute the amount of
               back pay and benefits due, and shall provide all relevant information requested by
               the Agency within thirty (30) calendar days of the Agency’s request. 12 The
               Agency shall issue a final agency decision on the amount of back pay owed to
               Complainant (“Back Pay FAD”), to include appeal rights and a detailed plain
               language explanation of its back pay calculations. The Back Pay FAD shall also
               be accompanied by documentation to support the Agency’s calculations and
               explanation.




9
  The Agency may, if Complainant agrees, offer Complainant a Social Insurance Specialist
(Claims Specialist), GS-105-7 (promotion potential to GS-11), or substantially equivalent
position based out of a different location so long as the position is full-time telework.
10
  The personnel documentation for the Selectee for the Poughkeepsie, NY vacancy reflects that
the effective start date for the position was June 23, 2019, and the full performance level of the
position was GS-11.
11
  The Agency shall determine Complainant’s initial GS-7 step level based on Complainant’s
GS-8 salary at the time of the nonselection, and calculate promotions and step increases
accordingly, based on full performance potential of GS-11.
12
   As Complainant was on extended FMLA leave in 2019, the Agency may request a statement
from Complainant’s physician confirming when Complainant would have been physically able
to start work. The back pay calculation will also assume that Complainant continued her regular
use of FMLA and would be granted full time telework and liberal use of leave as reasonable
accommodations upon placement into the Claims Specialist position.
                                                25                                     2021003393

           b. If there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of back pay, interest, and/or
              benefits, Complainant may appeal the Agency’s Back Pay FAD to the
              Commission. The Agency shall still pay Complainant the undisputed amount of
              back pay owed within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Back Pay FAD is
              issued. The back pay calculation and payment period should not exceed one
              hundred and twenty (120) calendar days.

       The Agency shall also pay Complainant compensation for any adverse tax consequences
       of receiving back pay as a lump sum. Complainant has the burden of establishing the
       amount of increased tax liability, if any.

   5. Training. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
      individuals identified in this decision as “Supervisor 1” and “Accommodation
      Coordinator” shall complete 2 hours of interactive training on the Agency’s obligations
      under the Rehabilitation Act, including, but not limited to what constitutes a disability
      and when and how to implement telework as a reasonable accommodation.

       For assistance in obtaining the necessary training, the Agency may contact the
       Commission’s Outreach, Training and Engagement Division via email, at
       FederalTrainingandOutreach@eeoc.gov. The Agency shall provide the Compliance
       Officer with proof of attendance, as well as the contents and materials it used for the
       training. If Supervisor 1 or Accommodation Coordinator has left the Agency's employ,
       the Agency shall furnish documentation of his/her/their departure date.

   6. Disciplinary Action. Within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date this
      decision is issued, the Agency shall consider disciplining “Supervisor 1” and
      “Accommodation Coordinator” for failing to provide Complainant with a reasonable
      accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. The Commission does not consider
      training to be disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the Compliance
      Officer. If the Agency decides to take disciplinary action, it shall identify the action
      taken. If the Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s)
      for its decision not to impose discipline. If Supervisor 1 or Accommodation Coordinator
      has left the Agency's employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of his/her/their
      departure date.

   7. Posting Notice. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
      Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the section listed below, entitled “Posting
      Order.” The Agency shall provide the Compliance Officer with the original signed and
      dated notice, reflecting the dates that the notice was posted, along with evidence that the
      notice was physically posted at the facility and electronically.

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision." The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                               26                                   2021003393

Further, the report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back
pay and other benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                                  POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its the Agency's Newburgh Field Office facility in Newburgh,
New York, copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the
Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic
format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall
remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices
to employees are customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said
notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is
to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation
of the Commission's Decision," within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period.
The report must be in digital format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

                                 ATTORNEY'S FEES (H0124)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), they are entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the
processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of attorney's fees shall be paid
by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of Federal Operations -- within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's
fees in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered
corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP)
supporting documents in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the
compliance docket number under which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance
is complete, the Agency shall submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format
required by the Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a
copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
                                                27                                    2021003393

Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying complaint in
accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil Action.” 29 C.F.R.
§§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on the underlying
complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If
the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the complaint,
including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                               RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting
reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or
brief must be filed together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty
(20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to
submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in
support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of
Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to
P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                                28                                     2021003393

Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service
on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which
case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

                 COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your
complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an
appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and
eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your
appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in
court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                           RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may
request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or
costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may
request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The
court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to
File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations

April 29, 2024
Date
