              U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                            Office of Federal Operations
                                   P.O. Box 77960
                              Washington, DC 20013


                                             Bret E., 1
                                           Complainant,

                                                 v.

                                          Louis DeJoy,
                                       Postmaster General,
                                   United States Postal Service,
                                             Agency.

                                     Appeal No. 2022002560

                                 Hearing No. 520-2021-00174X

                                  Agency No. 4C-080-0103-20

                                            DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or
Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s February 2, 2022 final
order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we REVERSE the Agency’s final order.

                                      ISSUES PRESENTED

The issues are whether Complainant established that the Agency discriminated against him based
on his religion when it failed to grant his request for a religious accommodation and terminated
him from his employment.

                                        BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier Assistant
(CCA) at the Bradley Beach Post Office in Bradley Beach, New Jersey.

On September 29, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the basis of religion (Jewish) when:


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace Complainant’s name
when the decision is published to non-parties and the Commission’s website.
                                                 2                                     2022002560


       1.      On May 9 and 30, 2020, Complainant was not accommodated per his religious
               beliefs when he was scheduled to work on the Sabbath; and
       2.      On or around June 3, 2020, Complainant was issued a Letter of Separation.

Complainant applied for Rural Carrier Assistant (RCA) and City Carrier Assistant (CCA)
positions. The RCA posting noted that RCAs would be required to work as needed and most work
would be performed on Saturdays. The CCA posting stated that work may be required on any day
of the week, including weekends and holidays. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 178.

On January 9, 2020, in response to an orientation letter for a CCA position, Complainant requested
that he not work on Fridays, one hour before sunset, on Saturdays, and Jewish holidays due to his
religious faith. ROI at 178. On January 10, 2020, Human Resources (HR) Generalist informed
Complainant that CCA positions were non-career and required weekend work and that due to
union restrictions, carriers would have to voluntarily swap shifts with him in order for him to have
Friday evenings and Saturdays off. ROI at 178-179; 211. HR Generalist advised Complainant that
he would pass Complainant’s request to management for further consideration.

On January 23, 2020, Complainant signed a CCA Expectations form, acknowledging and
accepting that the position required flexibility with “little to no lead time or advance notice of a
schedule change and be on call on non-scheduled days.” The form also noted that hours varied and
included holidays and weekends. ROI at 205. Postmaster also informed Complainant that he would
always try to accommodate him but due to the size of the branch and obligations to the union
contract, he could not always guarantee Complainant’s request. ROI at 190.

Postmaster explained that the Bradley Beach facility was a small four city route, and having all
employees report to work when scheduled was key to ensuring operational efficiency. Postmaster
explained that having just one route down delays 25% of his operation and forces the other carriers
to do their own route plus work several more hours on another route. ROI at 209.

Complainant’s first day at the Bradley Beach facility was on April 18, 2020. ROI at 175. According
to Complainant’s request, Postmaster was able to find coverage for Complainant on the following
Saturdays in the month of May: May 2, 16, and 23, 2020. ROI at 208. However, despite requesting
volunteers and contacting other facilities, Postmaster could not find coverage for Complainant on
Saturdays May 9 or 30, 2020. ROI at 178-179; 190. Complainant was made aware that no one
volunteered, and that Postmaster could not find a suitable replacement. As Complainant refused to
work on Saturday, May 9 or 30, 2020, Postmaster required another employee to work those shifts,
despite that employee having worked 7 and 11 days straight. ROI at 103; 190.

On June 1, 2020, Complainant asked HR Generalist whether the Agency could reassign him to a
larger facility, such as in Asbury Park, Neptune, Eatontown, or Long Beach, where it would be
less of a burden to accommodate his religious needs. ROI at 183. HR Generalist, however, did not
respond. After providing Complainant with a 30-day Employee Evaluation and Probationary
Report, which assessed Complainant as unsatisfactory in all categories due to his AWOLs on May
                                                 3                                     2022002560

9, and 30, 2020, the Agency removed Complainant from federal service on June 3, 2020, citing
his failure to meet the requirements of his position. ROI at 175 and 207.

Complainant subsequently filed a grievance through his union. During the informal grievance
process, Union Representative suggested that Complainant be transferred to a larger facility where
his needs could be met, and Complainant reached out to HR Generalist to see if it would be a
possibility. According to Union Representative, Postmaster acknowledged that a larger facility
might be able to accommodate Complainant, but not a smaller branch like Bradley Beach. ROI at
170. However, no transfer was made, and the removal action remained in effect. ROI at 170; 176.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing.
Both parties submitted motions for a decision without a hearing, and counter replies.

Over Complainant’s objections, the AJ issued a decision without a hearing on December 31, 2021,
which was finalized on January 19, 2022. In reaching her decision, the AJ determined that the
Agency accommodated Complainant by granting his request for time off on several occasions and
attempting to find employees to cover for him. However, the AJ found that it was clear that
Complainant’s inability to attend work with flexibility caused an undue burden that was not
hypothetical. Specifically, management had to get another CCA employee to cover Complainant’s
shift by working overtime, thereby increasing costs, and placing that employee under strain. The
AJ found that Complainant was hired as a non-career CCA employee, with flexibility being an
essential function of his job. A function, the AJ determined, Complainant could not meet. The AJ
found that Complainant had failed to allege facts that gave rise to an inference of discrimination
and found in the Agency’s favor.

The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed
to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. Complainant filed the instant
appeal. Both parties submitted appellate briefs.

                                 CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

Complainant argues that the Agency did not violate any union contract in this situation, and that
the facility never incurred any additional costs, beyond a de minimis one. For example,
Complainant contends that there was no specific contract violation or excessive overtime in having
another CCA cover his shift on May 30. Complainant notes that his colleague was paid 8 hours of
regular time, and 1.71 hours of overtime. Complainant asserts that he would have been paid the
same straight 8 hours and might have well incurred his own overtime if he had worked the shift.
In response, the Agency reiterates arguments previously made in its motion for summary
judgment, and its final decision. The Agency argues that while disagreeing with the AJ’s decision,
Complainant failed to show that the AJ improperly applied the law to the facts of the case, and that
Complainant failed to specifically identify any material facts in the record which are in dispute.
                                                 4                                      2022002560

For example, the Agency notes that Complainant’s appellate brief discusses how the Agency did
not have to spend an excessive amount in overtime costs to address his unavailability. The Agency
asserts that it was not simply the expenditure of excess resources, but that Complainant failed to
have the required flexibility and thus failed to meet one of the essential functions of his position.

                                    STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b),
the Agency’s decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).
See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of
record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

In rendering this appellate decision, we must scrutinize the AJ’s legal and factual conclusions, and
the Agency’s final order adopting them, de novo. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a) (stating that a
“decision on an appeal from an Agency’s final action shall be based on a de novo review . . .”);
see also Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI.B. (Aug. 5, 2015) (providing that an administrative judge’s
determination to issue a decision without a hearing, and the decision itself, will both be reviewed
de novo). This essentially means that we should look at this case with fresh eyes. In other words,
we are free to accept (if accurate) or reject (if erroneous) the AJ’s, and Agency’s factual
conclusions and legal analysis – including on the ultimate fact of whether intentional
discrimination occurred, and on the legal issue of whether any federal employment discrimination
statute was violated. See id. at Chap. 9, § VI.A. (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents,
statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

                                  ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a hearing upon finding that
there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision without a
hearing regulation follows the summary judgment procedure from federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P.
56. The U.S. Supreme Court held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge determines no
genuine issue of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards. Anderson v. Liberty
Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment motion, the judge is to
determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to weighing the evidence. Id. at
249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must believe the non-moving party’s evidence and
must draw justifiable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255.
                                                 5                                     2022002560

A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving
party. Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d
103, 105 (1st Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a case.

An AJ may issue a decision without a hearing only after determining that the record has been
adequately developed. See Petty v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 01A24206 (July 11, 2003).
We carefully reviewed the record and find that it is adequately developed. To successfully oppose
a decision without a hearing, Complainant must identify material facts of record that are in dispute
or present further material evidence establishing facts in dispute. Having reviewed the record, we
find that the AJ erred in issuing a decision without a hearing in favor of the Agency. Instead, we
conclude that the AJ should have entered judgment in favor of Complainant.

Denial of Religious Accommodation

Under Title VII, employers are required to accommodate the religious practices of their employees
unless a requested accommodation is shown to impose an undue hardship. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j);
29 C.F.R. § 1605.2(b)(1). The traditional framework for establishing a prima facie case of failure
to provide a religious accommodation requires an employee to demonstrate that: (1) he has a bona
fide religious belief, the practice of which conflicted with their employment; (2) he informed the
agency of this belief and conflict; and (3) the agency nevertheless enforced its requirement against
the employee. Heller v. EBB Auto Co., 8 F.3rd 1433, 1438 (9th Cir. 1993); Turpen v. Missouri-
Kansas-Texas R.R. Co., 736 F.2d 1022, 1026 (5th Cir. 1984).

In the present case, we find that Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination
based on a failure to accommodate his religion. Specifically, Complainant averred that his Jewish
faith requires him to forgo work on the Sabbath, which runs from sundown on Friday until
sundown on Saturday. Furthermore, he identified a practice of his religion which conflicts with
the requirements of the position, namely his need to forgo work on Friday nights and Saturday
days. Despite the Agency's knowledge that Complainant's schedule conflicted with his religious
beliefs, the Agency implemented a schedule that would, at times, require Complainant to work on
Fridays and/or Saturdays.

Once a complainant establishes a prima facie case, the agency must show that it made a good faith
effort to reasonably accommodate the employee’s religious beliefs and, if such proof fails, the
agency must show that the alternative means of accommodation proffered by complainant cannot
be granted without imposing an undue hardship on the agency’s operations. Complainant v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01976275 (Jan. 28, 2000).

To show undue hardship, an employer must demonstrate that an accommodation would require
more than a de minimis cost. Trans World Airlines v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63, 74 (1977). To prove
undue hardship, the employer needs to demonstrate how much cost or disruption a proposed
accommodation would involve. An employer cannot rely on potential or hypothetical hardship
when faced with a religious obligation that conflicts with schedule work, but rather should rely on
objective information.
                                                 6                                     2022002560

EEOC Compliance Manual Section 12, “Religious Discrimination,” No. 915.003 (July 22, 2008)
(Compliance Manual). Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1605.2(a)-(e), the Commission’s “Guidelines on
Discrimination Because of Religion” (the Guidelines), alternatives for accommodating an
employee's religious practices include, but are not limited to, voluntary substitutes and swaps,
flexible scheduling, and lateral transfers and job changes.

Here, the Agency asserts that it made good faith efforts to reasonably accommodate Complainant,
as the record shows that Postmaster sought voluntary shift swaps internally and at other facilities,
and accommodated Complainant three out of the five May 2020 Saturdays. While Postmaster
initially asserted that the Bradley Beach branch could not accommodate Complainant on May 9 or
30, 2020, because it would be an undue hardship given the small size of facility and small roster
of employees to facilitate voluntary shift swaps, during the informal grievance process, Postmaster
acknowledged that a larger facility might be able to better accommodate Complainant’s religious
needs. ROI at 170. Given this admission, 2 we find that the Agency should have considered
Complainant’s request for a lateral transfer to another facility, as nothing in the record remotely
suggests that such a request would be unfeasible or pose an undue hardship to the Agency. The
Agency, however, failed to even consider this possibility. Id. at 52.

Instead, the Agency summarily found that any further accommodation would cause an undue
hardship on its operations due to the nature of the flexible position required of a CCA position.
Such a per se rule, however, would render flexible workers with less protection under Title VII
than regular workers. Complainant v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01976275 (Jan. 28,
2000) (finding that the agency failed to engage in any effort to find complainant a reasonable
accommodation for his religion, such as considering voluntary shift swaps, flexible scheduling, or
lateral transfers to other facilities).

While the Agency has repeatedly argued that it could not accommodate Complainant because
granting Complainant’s request would often require, as it did on two occasions, overtime pay to
another CCA employee, we find insufficient evidence in the record to support the Agency's
position that the occasional overtime payment would result in anything more than a de minimis
cost. Indeed, the Agency provided no documentation that would demonstrate that it would be too
costly to have another employee, CCA or otherwise, to work during Sabbath hours. To the
contrary, we note that on appeal, Complainant asserts that the CCA employee that covered his shift
on May 30, 2020, only received 1.71 hours of overtime, an assertion, which the Agency does not
object to. We find that the extra 1.71 hours of overtime incurred by the Agency is hardly
burdensome and does not constitute more than a de minimis cost. As for the Agency’s argument
on appeal it was not necessarily the excessiveness of the overtime but the inability of Complainant
to maintain a flexible schedule, we note that the Agency had a number of alternate methods to
address and accommodate Complainant’s schedule and failed to do so.



2
 We note that neither the Postmaster nor the Agency denied Union Representative’s assertion that
during the informal grievance process, Postmaster conceded that accommodating Complainant
may be more feasible at a larger facility.
                                                 7                                      2022002560

With regard to the Agency’s argument that Complainant’s continued employment could
potentially violate the union contract, we find this argument to be wholly hypothetical. While the
Agency generally asserts that it could not violate the union contract to accommodate Complainant,
there is no indication that it was ever in a position that it would have been forced to violate the
union contract. While it may not have been ideal for one employee to take on an extra shift after
having worked 7 and 11 days straight, the Agency did not cite to a specific provision of the union
contract where this would have been a violation. Moreover, the Agency cannot rely on hypothetical
hardship when faced with a religious obligation that conflicts with schedule work, but rather it
must rely on objective information. See Compliance Manual. It failed to do so here.

Based on the record, we find that the Agency failed to engage in good faith efforts to accommodate
Complainant's religion. We note that while Postmaster made efforts and successfully
accommodated Complainant on three of the five May 2020 Saturdays, the Agency ultimately failed
to provide an ongoing reasonable accommodation.

Disparate Treatment

A claim of disparate treatment is examined under the three-part analysis first enunciated
in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). For complainant to prevail, he must
first establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting facts that, if unexplained,
reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination, i.e., that a prohibited consideration was a
factor in the adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; Furnco
Construction Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567 (1978). The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. See Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs
v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). Once the agency has met its burden, the complainant bears
the ultimate responsibility to persuade the fact finder by a preponderance of the evidence that the
agency acted on the basis of a prohibited reason. See St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S.
502 (1993).

With regard to Complainant's disparate treatment claim of religious discrimination when he was
terminated from employment, we find that Complainant established a prima facie case by
demonstrating facts, as detailed above, that are suggestive of discrimination. Applying the
standards set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, we find that Complainant has proved
that the Agency’s reasons for its actions were a pretext for discrimination. Specifically, the Agency
notified Complainant that he was separated from employment due to failure to meet the
requirements of his position, i.e., flexibility. However, the evidence supports Complainant's claim
that he was terminated when he failed to work on days for which he requested a religious
accommodation pursuant to Title VII. For example, Postmaster informed Complainant that he
required him to work Saturday May 30, 2020, when he failed to secure a voluntary swap. In
response, Complainant explained that he requested the Saturday off two weeks prior, and that he
could not work due to Sabbath. Complainant also noted his willingness to swap shifts, and that he
could take on a shift delivering mail starting at Saturday at 9:30 p.m., or even go early Sunday
morning, like 4 a.m. ROI at 164-165.
                                                8                                     2022002560

Postmaster eventually had another employee take Complainant’s shift; and used Complainant’s
absence, despite his clear religious accommodation request, to terminate his employment.

                                        CONCLUSION

We find that the Agency discriminated against Complainant when it failed to accommodate his
religion and terminated him after he failed to report to work as scheduled based on his religious
needs. Therefore, after a careful review of the record and arguments and evidence not specifically
addressed in this decision, we REVERSE the Agency’s decision and direct the Agency to take
remedial actions in accordance with this decision and the order below.

                                        ORDER (E0618)

   1. Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      offer Complainant an unconditional offer to reinstate him to his former CCA position at
      the Bradley Beach, New Jersey location, retroactive to his termination. If the position is
      not available, the Agency must make an unconditional offer of employment for a
      substantially equivalent position. The Agency shall also provide Complainant a reasonable
      accommodation for his religious beliefs. We acknowledge the Agency’s statement that a
      smaller facility such as Bradley Beach would have difficulty with voluntary shift swaps,
      however it is the Agency’s obligation to consider all possible methods of accommodating
      his religious beliefs, including, but not limited to lateral transfers, or changes in job
      assignments or crafts.

   2. Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date this decision is issued, the Agency will
      remove from Complainant’s personnel file the termination letter and any other associated
      disciplinary actions and adverse notices, such as, but not limited to the issued AWOL
      notices.

   3. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall restore
      or compensate Complainant for any leave that Complainant was forced to use from May
      2020 until his June 3, 2020 termination to avoid working on the Sabbath.

   4. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall pay
      Complainant back pay from the date of the termination until the discriminatory action has
      been remedied. The Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with
      interest, and other benefits due to Complainant.

   5. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall also
      pay compensation for the adverse tax consequences of receiving back pay as a lump sum.
      Complainant has the burden of establishing the amount of increased tax liability, if any.
      Once the Agency has calculated the proper amount of back pay, Complainant shall be given
      the opportunity to present the Agency with evidence regarding the adverse tax
      consequences, if any, for which Complainant shall then be compensated.
                                                     9                                     2022002560

      6. Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         conduct a supplemental investigation with respect to Complainant's entitlement to
         compensatory damages, including providing Complainant an opportunity to submit
         evidence of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages. For guidance on what evidence is
         necessary to prove pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages, the parties are directed to EEOC
         Enforcement Guidance: Compensatory and Punitive Damages Available Under § 102 of
         the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (July 14, 1992) (available at eeoc.gov). Complainant shall
         cooperate with the Agency in this regard. The Agency shall issue a final decision
         addressing the issue of compensatory damages no later than thirty (30) calendar days
         after the completion of the investigation.

      7. Within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that this decision is issued, the Agency
         shall provide EEO training to the relevant responsible management officials, HR
         Generalist 3 and Postmaster, 4 including at least two (two) hours of in-person or interactive
         training on Title VII and an Agency’s obligation to provide accommodations to its
         employees for religious observances. If any of the responsible management officials have
         left the Agency's employ, the Agency shall furnish documentation of their departure
         date(s).

      8. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
         consider taking disciplinary action against the responsible management official identified
         as Postmaster. The Commission does not consider training to be disciplinary action. The
         Agency shall report its decision to the Compliance Officer. If the Agency decides to take
         disciplinary action, it shall identify the action taken. If the Agency decides not to take
         disciplinary action, it shall set forth the reason(s) for its decision not to impose discipline.
         If any of the responsible management officials have left the Agency's employ, the Agency
         shall furnish documentation of their departure date(s).

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as provided in
the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's Decision.” The report shall be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further, the
report must include supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of back pay and other
benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been implemented.

                                      POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Bradley Beach Post Office facility in Bradley Beach, NJ copies
of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed by the Agency’s duly authorized
representative, shall be posted both in hard copy and electronic format by the Agency within
30 calendar days of the date this decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive
days, in conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily
posted.

3
    HR Generalist is identified at 177 of the ROI.
4
    Postmaster is identified at 187 of the ROI.
                                                10                                    2022002560

The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered, defaced, or
covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance
Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled "Implementation of the Commission's Decision,"
within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital
format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g).

            IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s corrective
action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of each ordered corrective
action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents
in the digital format required by the Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under
which compliance was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall
submit via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation
when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may petition the
Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a). The Complainant also has
the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with the Commission’s order prior to or
following an administrative petition for enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and
29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g). Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the
underlying complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a civil action on
the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp.
IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the administrative processing of the
complaint, including any petition for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders set forth in
this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this matter to the Office of
Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                           STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                              RECONSIDERATION (M0124.1)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if Complainant or the
Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
       1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or
          law; or
       2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
          operations of the agency.
                                                 11                                     2022002560

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO)
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party requesting reconsideration
elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days
from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or brief in support
of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can submit their
request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013,
or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a
legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the EEOC’s
Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or
statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of service on the other party, unless
Complainant files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s request for
reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented the timely filing of the
request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the
deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

               COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of your complaint.
However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file such action in an appropriate
United States District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in
which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.
                                                  12                                      2022002560

                            RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so, you may request
permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without paying these fees or costs.
Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the
court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for
filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for
the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                           Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Carlton M. Hadden, Director
Office of Federal Operations


February 7, 2024
Date
