                                          2                              2025001893

On August 7, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him based on a perceived disability (physical) when on June
10, 2024, he was issued a Letter of Removal from his position as a Student Postal
Police Officer based on a medical inability to perform the physical aspects of the
Postal Police Officer Basic Training Program.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation (ROI) and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge.

When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29
C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The Agency found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie
case of discrimination, but assuming that he had, management officials provided
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the removal action based on his failure to
demonstrate the ability to successfully or safely complete core components of the
Postal Police Basic Training Program, such as firearms training. The Agency then
determined that Complainant did not show pretext for discrimination. The Agency
concluded that Complainant failed to prove discrimination as alleged.

The instant appeal followed, but Complainant did not submit any arguments in
support of his appeal. The Agency did not respond to Complainant’s appeal.

                            STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the
Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5,
2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant
submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s
own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).
                                         3                             2025001893

                                   ANALYSIS

Disparate Treatment

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). A complainant must initially establish a prima facie
case by demonstrating that he/she was subjected to an adverse employment action
under circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco
Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will
vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. at
802 n.13. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine,
450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail, a complainant must prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the agency’s explanation is a pretext for
discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143
(2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

Assuming, arguendo, a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the Agency
provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the action. The Inspector in
Charge, who issued the removal letter, explained that the Postal Police Officer
Basic Training was a twelve-week in-residence program where students learn the
duties and responsibilities of a Postal Police Officer. The Inspector in Charge
averred that he decided to terminate Complainant from the training program based
on his inability to demonstrate the physical requirements, such as use of firearms;
controlled tactics; and officer survival tactics. ROI at 71-3. The notice of removal
also specified that Complainant could not successfully complete Control Tactics
training, which are utilized when apprehending suspects. Complainant’s
performance issues raised concerns for his safety, as well as the safety of others.
ROI at 100-1.

The Postal Police Officer Training Coordinator (Training Coordinator) attested that
Complainant struggled with racking and manipulating the slide of a firearm; was
unable to execute a full swing of a baton; was unable to apply pressure during
control tactics training; had difficulty maneuvering handcuffs when attempting to
place them on individuals; and was unable to properly execute “break falls.”
Complainant was also unable to kneel and return to a standing position while
holding a firearm unassisted.
                                         4                             2025001893

The Training Coordinator added that Complainant was offered an opportunity to
obtain further medical evaluation but declined. 2 ROI at 80-1, 83.

The Training Instructor recalled that Complainant informed him of a pre-existing
wrist injury but did not provide any medical documentation. The Training
Instructor noted that Complainant did not previously report the injury and did not
elaborate on the severity, but the Training Instructor observed that Complainant’s
wrist was clearly swollen. Complainant stated that he was unable to manipulate the
standard duty weapon and was in pain. The Training Instructor added that
Complainant was seen trying to conceal his wrist injury and was instructed that he
could not wear any wrist wrap or brace. ROI at 86-7.

Complainant averred that he informed the Training Inspector that his wrist was a
little sore and only needed a day or two (2) of rest. ROI at 59. However, the
Training Instructor responded that Complainant never stated that he only needed a
day or two (2) of rest, or that his wrist was “only a little sore.” ROI at 87.
Complainant did not request a hearing before an AJ, and he bears the burden to
prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged discriminatory acts
occurred. When the evidence is at best equipoise, Complainant fails to meet that
burden. See Lore v. Dep’t of Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 0120113283
(Sept. 13, 2013) (complainant failed to establish that witnesses made false
statements where he withdrew his request for a hearing and credibility
determinations were unable to be made); Brand v. Dep’t of Agriculture, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120102187 (Aug. 23, 2012) (complainant failed to establish that his
coworker made offensive comments in a “he said, she said” situation where


2
  Employers may require a medical examination or make disability-related
inquiries of an employee only if the examination is job-related and consistent with
business necessity. See Enforcement Guidance: Disability-Related Inquiries and
Medical Examinations of Employees Under the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) EEOC No. 915.002 (July 27, 2000), at 5. This requirement is met when the
employer has a reasonable belief, based on objective evidence, that: (1) an
employee’s ability to perform the essential job functions is impaired by a medical
condition; or (2) that an employee poses a direct threat due to a medical condition.
See id. at 14. In this case, there is no evidence that the Agency required a medical
examination.
                                         5                             2025001893

complainant requested a final decision and an Administrative Judge did not make
credibility determinations).

Complainant did not show that the proffered reasons are not worthy of belief, and
his bare assertions that management officials discriminated against him are
insufficient to prove pretext or that their actions were discriminatory. As such, we
find that Complainant did not establish discrimination based on a perceived
disability when the Agency issued a Letter of Removal from his position as a
Student Postal Police Officer.

                                 CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including
those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                           6                               2025001893

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint
the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that
person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the
dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. If
you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will
terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                           7                              2025001893

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


April 7, 2026
Date
