           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                    Cathy V., 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                   Scott Bessent,
                                     Secretary,
                            Department of the Treasury
                            (Internal Revenue Service),
                                      Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025003200

                             Agency No. IRS-24-0276

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 16, 2025 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et
seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final
decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Legal Assistant, GS-0986-6, in the Agency’s Tax Exempt and
Government Entities Division in Cincinnati, Ohio.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025003200

On March 5, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of disability (mental) and in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when:

      1. On February 27, 2024, Complainant’s manager issued Complainant a
         performance appraisal lower than the year prior;
      2. Complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation when she was not
         effectively accommodated following her October 2023 request;
      3. Complainant was denied Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) leave,
         when she was told she was not entitled to FMLA leave.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant did not
prove that she was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. Complainant
then filed the instant appeal.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record and construing any inferences raised by the
undisputed facts in favor of Complainant, we find that Complainant failed to
establish discrimination, retaliation, or denial of a reasonable accommodation.
Regarding Issue 1, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the
Agency’s performance assessment was motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory
animus. The record reflects that Complainant’s documented performance
deficiencies predated her request for reasonable accommodation, undermining her
claim of retaliation. Complainant also failed to present evidence showing that the
Agency’s assessment of her performance was a pretext for discrimination.

Regarding Issue 2, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to establish that
the Agency denied her request for a reasonable accommodation. The record reflects
that Complainant voluntarily transferred to the Office of Chief Counsel before the
interactive process concluded, ending the Agency’s obligation to continue that
process for her prior position. The record further shows that Complainant received
workplace assistance but nevertheless was unable to successfully perform the
essential functions of her position.
                                           3                               2025003200

Regarding Issue 3, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to establish that
the Agency denied her FMLA leave. The record demonstrates that Complainant’s
FMLA requests were routinely approved, and Complainant presented no evidence
to the contrary.
                               CONCLUSION

Complainant failed to demonstrate that the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons for its actions were pretext for discrimination, retaliation, or failure to
provide reasonable accommodation. Therefore, based on our review of the record
and the contentions on appeal, including those not specifically addressed herein, we
AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
                                           4                              2025003200

77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025003200

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________               Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


August 10, 2026
Date
