                                          2                              2026001383

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as Mail
Processing Clerk at the Agency’s Margaret Sellers Processing and Distribution
Center in San Diego, CA. On September 5, 2023, he filed an EEO complaint
alleging that the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of race (African-
American), sex (male), color (black), disability (mental), and reprisal for protected
EEO activity when, among other things, a supervisor subjected him to intimidation;
he was issued a 7-Day Suspension for Unacceptable Conduct; and when he notified
management that he was leaving early due to his Family and Medical Leave Act
(FMLA) protected condition, his manager told him that he was not allowed to leave
and charged him with Absent Without Leave rather than the sick leave he requested.

After completion of the investigation, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision and in accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final
decision finding that Complainant did not establish that he was subjected to
discrimination as alleged. Complainant appealed and on appeal, in a decision dated
February 26, 2026, the Commission affirmed the Agency’s final order finding no
discrimination.

Complainant filed the instant request for reconsideration, arguing that the appellate
decision made an erroneous interpretation of material fact because it did not consider
the cumulative effect of all the incidents and mischaracterized the incidents of
harassment as incidents of routine supervision. In support, Complainant offered new
evidence that he asserts shows that management subjected him to physical
aggression and workplace violence so that the San Diego police were called.2 The
Agency did not file a brief in response.

We reject Complainant’s arguments in his request for reconsideration as they
amount to nothing more than reiterating his previous arguments on appeal. We
emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the
Commission. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9, § VILA (Aug. 5, 2015). Rather, a
reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision

2
  To the extent that Complainant relies on this new evidence in his request for
reconsideration, we note that new evidence is not permitted in a request for
reconsideration and therefore, it will not be considered. See Stuart M. v. Dep’t of
Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 2021000275 (Dec. 29, 2020) (noting that new evidence
is not one of the stated grounds for reconsideration).
                                          3                              2026001383

involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Contrary
to Complainant’s arguments in his request for reconsideration, Complainant has not
done so here. A material fact is something that would change the outcome of the
case; however, Complainant’s unsupported disagreements with the appellate
decision’s characterization of the incidents of alleged harassment are irrelevant to
the ultimate issue of whether or not Complainant established that the Agency was
motivated by discriminatory animus. While Complainant clearly feels he was
treated unfairly based on his protected classes, there is no evidence in the record to
support his assertions of discriminatory animus. The Commission has repeatedly
stated that mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is a pretext for
intentional discrimination are insufficient because subjective belief, however
genuine, does not constitute evidence of any unlawful motive. See Leif S. v. Dep’t
of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 2021004037 (April 28, 2022); Juliet B. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019). Moreover, to the extent
Complainant insists that he was subjected to unlawful harassment, we have
repeatedly stated that the EEO laws are not a civility code. Rather, they forbid “only
behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the victim’s
employment.” Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998).
Finally, the record simply does not show that the conduct at issue was based on
animus towards Complainant’s protected classes. See Leif S. v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec’y, EEOC Appeal No. 2021003202 (May 18, 2022) (stating that a complainant’s
harassment claim fails where there is no evidence that the complainant was harassed
due to his protected bases).

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds
that the request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the
decision of the Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No.
2024004472 remains the Commission's decision. There is no further right of
administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on this request.

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0124)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of
administrative appeal from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90)
calendar days from the date that you receive this decision.
                                           4                              2026001383

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


June 2, 2026
Date
