           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                  Santo D., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                Frank Bisignano,
                                 Commissioner,
                         Social Security Administration,
                                    Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2025004033

                        Agency No. SEA-24-0844-SSA

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
July 21, 2025, final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an
Operations Supervisor at the Agency’s field office in Tacoma, Washington.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                         2                             2025004033

On November 1, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against him based on race (Black), age (year of birth: 1963),
and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when between April 17, 2023, and
present, the Agency subjected Complainant to harassment based on race (Black),
age (year of birth: 1963), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity in terms
of a four-day suspension, threatened with termination, false accusations, charged as
absent without leave (AWOL), and working conditions.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision
concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. Complainant filed the instant appeal. Upon careful
review of the evidence of record, we conclude the Agency’s finding of no
discrimination is consistent with the law and facts of record.

Complainant generally asserts his first line supervisor (S1) began subjecting him to
harassment soon after she became his supervisor. The record indicates that on
November 16, 2023, Complainant’s second line supervisor (S2) sustained a
decision to suspend Complainant for four days based on multiple specifications
indicating that on occasions between June 2023 and July 2023, Complainant
improperly disclosed social security numbers. Complainant was also found to
have failed to comply with Agency requirements for requesting leave, including
being absent without prior approval while on duty, and allowing his grandchild –
an unauthorized individual – to be present in the facility. Complainant was also
found to not have adhered to Agency procedures when he failed to escort visitors
throughout their entire time inside the facility. The record further indicates S1
charged Complainant with AWOL after he left work early without permission on
July 25, 2023. S1 and S2 denied threatening Complainant with termination.

Complainant has not presented any evidence that persuasively suggests that the
Agency was motivated by his protected classes. When asked why he believed the
Agency was motivated by his protected classes, Complainant failed to state a
reason and responded, “There have been several EEO complaints filed…”
Complainant has not articulated a reason other than his own beliefs to attribute the
Agency’s actions to discriminatory animus.
                                         3                             2025004033

Complainant also has not identified any similarly situated employees outside his
protected classes that were treated more favorably than him. Notably, when asked
how management’s actions altered conditions of employment, he stated, “[He]
along with others felt the morale collapse.” Complainant has not met his burden of
showing that the Agency’s actions were related to his protected classes.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507.
                                           4                              2025004033

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be
deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of
the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025004033

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:



_________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 13, 2026
Date
