                                          2                              2025001716

On November 13, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination and harassment based on her race
(Caucasian), sex (female), disability (hearing impaired), and age (57) when:

      1. On October 26, 2023, her Performance Assessment and Communication
         System (PACS) was lowered;

      2. Beginning October 26, 2023, to present, she was subjected to harassment
         with regard to PACS appraisal, speaking to her in an unprofessional
         manner, work assignments, no flexibility with work schedule, unrealistic
         job duties, manager stated she is inadequate to the job and does not know
         how to relate to her and nitpicking;

      3. from March 2020 through at least January 25, 2024, Complainant was
         denied a reasonable accommodation when she was not provided a fully
         operational CapTel phone.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but
subsequently withdrew her request. The AJ remanded the case to the Agency for a
final agency decision. On February 13, 2025, the Agency issued a final agency
decision (FAD1) finding that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination.
Complainant appealed the decision; however, the Agency rescinded FAD1, and
performed a supplemental investigation into Claim 3.

By letter dated July 23, 2025, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
supplemental investigation with notice of her right to request a hearing before an
EEOC AJ. After failing to request a hearing within the applicable time limits, the
Agency issued a FAD (FAD2), in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the
decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that she was
subjected to discrimination as alleged.2




2
 Complainant did not submit any additional arguments on appeal after receiving
FAD2.
                                           3                               2025001716

We find that the alleged incidents were more likely the result of routine supervision,
personality conflicts, and general workplace disputes and tribulations and are
therefore insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a discriminatory hostile work
environment. Furthermore, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show
that the alleged conduct was based on discriminatory animus. Moreover,
Complainant has not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the Agency's
legitimate, non-discriminatory explanation for its employment actions was pretext
for discrimination.

We also conclude that the Agency did not deny Complainant reasonable
accommodation to which she was entitled and did not otherwise violate the
Rehabilitation Act. Based on the preponderance of the evidence, the delay in the
installation of the phone can be attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic, office
construction following a return to the office after the COVID-19 pandemic,3 and
miscommunication over the need of the phone. The record indicates the phone was
installed shortly after Complainant raised concerns with her supervisor.

Upon careful review of the Agency’s decision, including Complainant’s arguments
on appeal, we conclude that the Agency correctly determined that the preponderance
of the evidence did not establish that Complainant was discriminated against by the
Agency as alleged. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.4

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or

3
  Complainant did not need the CapTel phone while teleworking.
4
  We note that Complainant requested a right to sue letter, which pertains to the
private sector (rather than federal sector) EEO process. To the extent Complainant
is seeking to file a civil action on this matter, she should refer to the paragraph below
entitled “Complainant's Right to File a Civil Action” which provides her rights to
file a civil action in federal district court.
                                           4                               2025001716

      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted
together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will consider
requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                           5                              2025001716

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 18, 2026
Date
