          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                       Office of Federal Sector
                           P.O. Box 77960
                       Washington, DC 20013


                                    Season H., 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                 David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                           United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025001709

                           Agency No. 1C-931-0340-22

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 7, 2025, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.
For the following reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision.

                               ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether the Agency's investigation was adequate for a factfinder to draw
conclusions as to whether Complainant established that she was subjected to
discrimination based on her disability.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025001709

                                 BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a General
Clerk, Level 6, with the Agency’s Northern Virginia Processing and Distribution
Center (NoVA P&DC), located in Merrifield, Virginia. On January 5, 2023,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against
her on the basis of disability (hearing impairment) when, on September 27, 2022,
her videophone was damaged by a co-worker.2

Factual Background

Complainant is hearing impaired and is not able to read lips. The General Clerk
position requires Complainant to perform a variety of office clerical duties using
postal knowledge or experience at a post office. Such clerical duties include but are
not limited to: (a) maintaining books, manuals, and directories; (b) providing routine
information to the public; (c) addressing minor service complaints; (d) verifying and
protecting time records, carfare expenditures, registered insured and collect on
delivery mail; (e) preparing holiday time, compensatory time and daily work
schedules; and (f) correcting and maintaining mailing lists.

Complainant is not able to effectively communicate and perform many of her duties
without the use of a video phone (VP) 3 or an in-person American Sign Language
(ASL) interpreter. Complainant is able to perform the essential functions of her
position with these accommodations. Prior to the events at issue herein, the Agency
provided Complainant with the use of a VP at her workspace. 4 Complainant’s
workspace is not private and is used by other employees when Complainant is not
at work.

2
  Complainant’s original complaint included three additional claims. The Agency
dismissed the entire complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1), for failure to
state a claim. In Regina M v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2023002281 (May
22, 2024), the Commission affirmed the dismissal of all but the instant claim. The
Commission remanded this claim for further processing. Further, Complainant
initially raised additional bases but has withdrawn all except disability.
3
  The VP allows deaf employees to make and receive phone calls by using an ASL
interpreter on demand.
4
  The record indicates that additional VPs were placed in various locations at the
NoVA P&DC.
                                         3                               2025001709


On August 2, 2023, Complainant’s hearing impaired husband (Supervisor,
Distribution Operations at the NoVA P&DC) emailed the disability coordinator
(RAC) on behalf of Complainant and a hearing impaired Expeditor at the NoVA
P&DC (Coworker1) who uses the VP. The email stated:


       We are having issues with our VPs again. I cc'd my wife, and another
       Deaf co-worker on Tour 1, [Coworker1] on this email as their VPs
       are experiencing the same issues. It is crucial that we get all the VPs
       up and working again. The camera or the network/internet is
       glitching so that the video is not able to be understood. I have
       attached an example to this email as well. If you can please get
       someone from Sorenson, or USPS IT in to fix this issue ASAP, we
       would appreciate it.

Included in this email were the following Agency officials: (a) the Manager of
Disability Programs (RAC Manager); (b) the Acting Senior, Manager, Distribution
Operations (Supervisor1); (c) a contract technician (IT Contractor); (d) Senior
Manager, Distributions Operations (now retired) (Retired MDO); (e) a Manager,
Distributions Operations (Supervisor2);5 (f) Coworker1; (g) an Information
Technology employee (IT Tech); and (h) an individual whose job title is not
identified in the record with the initials DM (DM).

Email correspondence between Complainant’s husband and IT Contractor between
August 3, 2023, and September 15, 2023, indicate that IT Contractor was working
with others on resolving the problem and kept Complainant’s husband apprised of
the situation. On September 14, 2023, IT Contractor emailed Complainant’s husband
stating:


       We were able to correct the VRI/VRS system. We spoke with
       Sorenson. In the future if there is an issue with the video quality the
       VRS (Just the Video) needs to be unplugged for 30 seconds and then

5
 According the EEO investigation, Supervisor2 was sent an affidavit on August 27,
2024, and again on September 11, 2024, and it was escalated by leadership on
October 8, 2024, but to date nothing has been returned.
                                         4                              2025001709

       plugged back in. It should reset the system, and it can be operated
       normally afterwards. I am going to put signage up at the VRS so that
       the other employees who use them know.

Complainant’s husband responded to IT Contractor (and copied the individuals
noted above)6 on the same day as follows:
       I am not sure why I was the only one to get the message about the
       videophone. [Everyone please see below] I did send the email on
       behalf of all the Deaf employees who regularly use the Videophones
       and relay on them, but you need to include all of them on the replies.
       Please make sure to include them and their supervisors on
       communication about videophone issues and ways to fix them. They
       all need to know this information.

       I noticed in your email that you used "VRI/VRS" - I would like to
       remind you once again these are these DIFFERENT pieces of
       equipment with two DIFFERENT types of hardware and software.
       There is nothing wrong with the VRI currently. I want to make sure
       that you knew this, as every time I ask you about the VP you reply
       talking about the VRI as well.

       I would also like to remind you that English is our second language
       and placing signage up in English, though helpful for some, this NOT
       effective. You need to make time to be face-to-face with each
       employee and show them as to what you are referring. Your email
       itself is not clear. Are you talking about unplugging the NTOUCH7
       The television? The ethernet cable? A power strip? You need to go
       to each employee and at minimum demonstrate "how to" do what it
       is to fix the VP. In a perfect world you would do this with an
       interpreter, so that each Deaf employee can ask you questions and
       communicate clearly with you. Really, this should be considered a
       safety talk or a training, in which you must have an interpreter with
       you. We at the very least deserve this, especially since we all rely on
       the use of VP to do our jobs effectively. This training should also
6
 Complainant’s husband also included two additional supervisors (Supervisor4 and
Supervisor5).
                                         5                             2025001709

       include each Deaf employee's supervisor/ MOO as they also need to
       know this vital information and be able to do it to. According to
       USPS, all Supervisors and MDOs need to know this training, and if
       not them checking these pieces of equipment regularly, someone else
       would need to be appointed and everyone should also be notified of
       this.

       I cannot speak to the other Deaf employees as to when the best time
       to meet with you would be. Personally, I look forward to meeting
       with you sometime soon so that you can demonstrate to me what it
       is you are talking about.

The following day (September 15, 2023) IT Contractor responded to Complainant’s
husband and copied RAC, Complainant, Coworker1, Supervisor1, Supervisor2, and
Supervisor4, Supervisor5. The email response states the following:

      Unplugging the power cord for the VRS from the power strip and
      waiting thirty seconds. When it is plugged back in it should be able to
      be used. IK can mark the cord if that would help. Maybe a piece of red
      tape wrapped around the bottom neck of it? If there is an issue please
      let me know which VRS is being effected and I can resolve.

Complainant asserts that she was told that the VP was “fixed” a few times via email,
but when she tested it, it would not be working, or it would work one time and then
fail. Complainant also asserts that she was told a few times that someone from the
VP company (Sorenson) came out and once again fixed it but when she went to use
the VP it would not work. Complainant was also told at one point that every time
she needed to use the equipment, she must crawl behind the equipment, unplug it,
wait for 10 minutes, then plug it in again and wait for it to reboot and that would
"fix" it. Complainant asserts that this option was extremely limiting, very time
consuming, and did not always temporarily solve the issue. Complainant further
asserts that as of August 2024 (approximately a year from the initial date of her
complaint) the problem was not rectified.

In response to numerous questions about the VP equipment, RAC testified that she
is the “Manager of Employee Development and District Disability Coordinator.”
                                          6                              2025001709

She also stated: “I am not aware; I do not know the employee directly or indirectly
and or if any equipment was damaged. I do not work at the facility. … I am not
aware of any damages to any technology. … I am not aware of any equipment failure
or fixes. … If there is any inoperable equipment, any and all employees should report
it to their immediate supervisor.”

Complainant’s immediate supervisor at the time (late summer/fall of 2023) was
Supervisor5. In September 2024, Supervisor5 testified as to having no knowledge
about Complainant in general. Supervisor5 also had no knowledge as to whether the
VP was ever damaged or repaired. In response to whether the VP was currently
operational Supervisor5 states: “It looks like it now, she has been using her
workstation since she got access again.” Supervisor5 does not further explain this
statement.

The record indicates that the management official tasked with the VP issue was
Supervisor1. Supervisor1 admitted that there was a problem with the video screen
which she described as “going up and down” Supervisor1 also stated that “as far as
she knows” the equipment is operational. Supervisor1 also asserts that Complainant
spoke with Supervisor2 about it and Complainant did not find the response adequate.
Supervisor1 further states that she spoke with Retired MDO but did not provide
specifics.

The remaining witnesses who provided testimony were supervisors with no direct
knowledge of the relevant facts. No one from IT (including IT Contractor or IT Tech)
were asked to provide testimony. RAC Manager was not asked to provide testimony.
Supervisor2 and Supervisor4 did not provide testimony. Complainant also testified
that the Human Resources Manager (HR Manager) and a Human Resources
Specialist (HR Specialist) were notified of the issues with the VP. However, neither
individual from human resources was asked to provide testimony. Lastly, the two
hearing impaired employees (other than Complainant) who also use the VP
equipment (i.e., Complainant’s husband and Coworker1) were not asked to provide
testimony.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing within
the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
                                         7                             2025001709

The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
her to discrimination as alleged.

                            STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the
Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015)
(explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the Commission
examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and
testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

                                   ANALYSIS

The Agency does not dispute that Complainant is an individual with a disability and
is qualified to perform the essential functions of her position with accommodation.
The Agency also does not dispute that Complainant is entitled to the VP
accommodation under the Rehabilitation Act. 7 The ultimate issue is whether the

7
 The use of a video phone and other equipment has been generally recognized as
necessary to ensure hearing impaired employees can communicate on the job and
have the same privileges of employment as employees without hearing impairments.
See Coralee H. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120172277 (Feb. 15, 2019);
Complainant v. Dep’t. of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 0120123107 (Mar. 18,
2014); Deena B. v. U.S. Postal Ser’v., EEOC Appeal No. 0120171139 (Mar. 26,
2019); John C. Holton v. U.S. Postal Ser’v., EEOC Appeal No. 01991307 (Nov. 7,
2002).
                                          8                              2025001709

Agency met its obligation to provide a working VP for Complainant. We find that
the record is not sufficiently developed to answer this question.

EEOC regulation requires, inter alia, that an agency develop an impartial and
appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the claims raised in the
complaint. One purpose of an investigation is to gather facts upon which a
reasonable fact finder may draw conclusions as to whether a violation of the
discrimination statutes has occurred. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b); EEO MD-110, at
Chap. 6, § IV.B. An investigation must include “a thorough review of the
circumstances under which the alleged discrimination occurred; the treatment of
members of the Complainant's group as compared with the treatment of similarly
situated employees...and any policies and/or practices that may constitute or appear
to constitute discrimination, even though they have not been expressly cited by the
complainant.” Id. at § IV.C. In addition, an investigator must identify and obtain “all
relevant evidence from all sources regardless of how it may affect the outcome.” Id.
at § VI.D. Upon review, however, we find that the EEO investigation was inadequate
and that the record lacks the thoroughness required for the fact finder to address the
ultimate issue of whether Complainant established a violation of the Rehabilitation
Act by failing to ensure that she had a working video phone.

Here, the record shows that a problem with Complainant’s accommodation was
raised with the District Accommodation Coordinator (i.e., RAC) and the Manager
of Disability Programs (i.e., RAC Manager). Yet, the record is devoid of evidence
that either individual did anything to ensure that the reasonable accommodation
request was processed and resolved. It is unclear as to whether this information exists
but was not obtained for the investigation or whether the Agency simply did not
process this matter under the disability programs office.

While Supervisor1 provided testimony, the testimony is extremely vague and
limited. Supervisor1’s testimony raises questions to the extent of her knowledge of
the relevant facts. The limited evidence in the record also indicates that
Complainant’s work was not constantly supervised and her direct supervisors had
limited knowledge of her daily activities. The record also indicates that management
was responsible for periodically checking the equipment to ensure that it was
working properly. However, not one responsible management official was identified
or testified on this subject.
                                         9                              2025001709

Complainant asserts that the VP was never working properly. At best the VP
required constant rebooting which management apparently believes is an effective
solution to the problem. We are not convinced based on the limited record whether
the required rebooting was reasonable or effective. None of the other VP users (i.e.,
Complainant’s husband and Coworker1) provided testimony on the effectiveness.8
The supervisors who testified failed to provide specific details to their vague
assumption or belief that the VP equipment was working properly.

Accordingly, we find the investigative record is inadequate and needs to be
supplemented so that a determination on the merits of Complainant's complaint can
be made. See generally, Stewart v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., EEOC Request No.
0520070124 (Nov. 14, 2011) (inadequate investigation); O'Neill v. Dep't of State,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120083597 (Jan. 15, 2009) (inadequate investigation).

                                  CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including
those not specifically addressed herein, we VACATE the Agency's decision and
REMAND the matter for supplemental investigation and further processing in
accordance with the ORDER set forth below.

                 ORDER TO SUPPLEMENT RECORD (B0224)

Within ninety (90) days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct
and complete a supplemental investigation consistent with the requirements of 29
C.F.R. § 1614.108(b), in EEO MD-110, Chapter 6 and consistent with this decision.
The supplemental investigation shall include, but is not limited to:

         a. Additional sworn testimony, and any supporting documentation, from
            Complainant to include greater details as to the full history of the
            Agency's alleged failure to accommodate her disability since August
            2023; 9

8
  Notably, Complainant, who is not represented by an attorney, is limited in her
ability to communicate with the EEO investigator. The record is devoid of evidence
that she was afforded any accommodations to communicate more effectively.
9
  This shall include: (a) how often the VP was working properly and how often it
was not; (b) the efforts made (and by whom) to notify management of the ongoing
                                       10                             2025001709

         b. Sworn testimony and any supporting documentation from RAC and
            RAC Manager addressing their knowledge and/or involvement with
            efforts made to ensure the Agency engaged in the interactive process
            and addressed Complainant’s need for accommodation, including what
            efforts were made or not made to ensure that the VP was working
            properly;
         c. Sworn testimony and any supporting documentation from HR Manager
            and HR Specialist addressing their knowledge and/or involvement with
            efforts made to ensure the Agency engaged in the interactive process
            and addressed Complainant’s need for accommodation, including what
            efforts were made or not made to ensure that the VP was working
            properly;
         d. Sworn testimony and supporting documentation from Complainant’s
            husband and Coworker1 addressing their knowledge and/or
            involvement with efforts made or not made to ensure that the VP
            equipment was working properly; 10
         e. Sworn testimony and supporting documentation from every individual
            identified in the emails to or from Complainant’s husband between
            August 2, 2023, and September 15, 2023, addressing their knowledge
            and/or involvement with the efforts made or not made to ensure the VP
            equipment was working properly; 11
         f. Sworn testimony from the individual with the initials DM who was
            included in Complainant’s husband’s August 8, 2023, email to IT
            Contractor addressing his job title, knowledge and/or involvement with
            respect to the efforts made or not made to ensure that the VP equipment
            was working properly;
         g. Sworn testimony from the individual identified as IK in IT Contractor’s
            email to Complainant’s husband on September 15, 2023, addressing his

problem; (c) who was notified and when; and (d) any efforts by management to
follow up. In addition, Complainant should be provided the opportunity to present
her testimony through deposition with the EEO investigator using an ASL
interpreter.
10
   Such testimony shall include details of information pertaining to Complainant’s
VP equipment as well as the other VP equipment throughout the facility beginning
in August 2023 through the present.
11
   This includes IT Contractor, Complainant’s husband, Supervisor1, Supervisor2,
Supervisor3, Supervisor4, Supervisor5, and others.
                                          11                             2025001709

             identity, knowledge and/or involvement with respect to the efforts
             made or not made to ensure that the VP equipment was working
             properly; and
          h. Sworn testimony from any additional individuals discovered to have
             relevant information during this supplement investigation on the
             relevant subject matter.
          i. The Agency shall also offer Complainant an opportunity to submit a
             rebuttal to the additional sworn testimony obtained during the
             supplemental investigation. 12
Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide the Complainant
with a copy of the original report of investigation, as well as the supplemental record
and findings, and shall notify Complainant of the appropriate rights, including the
right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge. If the Complainant
requests a final decision without hearing, the Agency shall issue a final decision
within thirty (30) days of receipt of Complainant's request, including appeal rights.
As provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission's
Decision,” the Agency must send to the Compliance Officer: 1) a copy of the
Agency's letter of acknowledgment to Complainant, 2) a copy of the Agency's notice
that transmits the investigative file and notice of rights, and 3) either a copy of the
complainant's request for a hearing, or a copy of the final agency decision (“FAD”)
if Complainant does not request a hearing.

In accordance with Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § IX.E (Aug. 5, 2015), the Agency shall
give priority to this remanded case in order to comply with the time frames contained
in this Order. The Office of Federal Sector will issue sanctions against agencies
when it determines that agencies are not making reasonable efforts to comply with
a Commission order to investigate a complaint.




12
  Complainant shall be provided with the opportunity to give such sworn testimony
via deposition using an ASL interpreter.
                                          12                              2025001709

      IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s
corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of
each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO
Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital format required by the
Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under which compliance
was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via
FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting
documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of
all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may
petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with
the Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for
enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying
complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C.
2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders
set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this
matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for
enforcement by that agency.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
                                           13                              2025001709

      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                          14                              2025001709

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of
your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file
such action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90)
calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. In the alternative, you
may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the
date you filed your complaint with the Agency or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



_________________________ Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 28, 2026
Date
