            U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Sector
                               P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013




                                    Armand L.,1
                                    Complainant,

                                          v.

                               Douglas A. Collins,
                                   Secretary,
                          Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                    Agency.

                              Request No. 2026002278

                              Appeal No. 2026000781

                       Agency No. 200J-0010-2024-160259

             DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No. 2026000781
(April 23, 2026). EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its
discretion, grant a request to reconsider any previous Commission decision issued
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting party demonstrates that:
(1) the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact
or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Video
Editor at the Agency’s Institute for Learning, Education, and Development facility
1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2026002278

in St. Louis, Missouri. On August 29, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint
alleging discrimination by the Agency on the bases of sex (male) and disability
(mental) when he was suspended for two weeks; denied a detail position; denied a
reasonable accommodation; given a lowered performance rating; and his office
location was changed. Complainant also alleged that he was subjected to a hostile
work environment when his former supervisor made sexually inappropriate remarks,
micromanaged him, and made snide remarks to him.

After completion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy
of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge, or a final
decision from the agency. When Complainant requested a final Agency decision,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision
concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged.

Complainant appealed and on appeal, in a decision dated April 23, 2026, the
Commission affirmed the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

Complainant filed the instant request for reconsideration, arguing among other
things, that the appellate decision made several factual errors and also alleging that
he was terminated, which he asserts was retaliatory.2 In response, the Agency filed
a brief urging denial of Complainant’s request for reconsideration.

We reject Complainant’s arguments in his request for reconsideration as they
amount to nothing more than reiterating his previous arguments on appeal. We
emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the
Commission. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9, § VILA (Aug. 5, 2015). Rather, a
reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency.

2
  We note that Complainant’s termination was not raised before the Agency.
However, the Commission has held that it is inappropriate for a complainant to raise
new claims for the first time in a request for reconsideration. We therefore decline
to address Complainant’s termination in this decision. See Gilberto C. v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 2025004575 (Feb. 12, 2026).
                                           3                              2026002278

Complainant has not done so here. With respect to the various factual “errors”
Complainant cites, Complainant’s argument is without merit as none of the alleged
errors are relevant to the ultimate issue of whether the Agency was motivated by
discriminatory or retaliatory animus or whether the alternative accommodation the
Agency offered Complainant was ineffective so as to violate the Rehabilitation Act.
Moreover, to the extent Complainant assigns error to the appellate decision for
accepting the management officials’ statements, we note that because Complainant
did not request a hearing, the Commission did not have the benefit of an AJ’s
credibility determinations and could only evaluate the facts based on the evidence
presented. See Liz M. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 0120150805 (April
5, 2017).

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds
that the request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the
decision of the Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No.
2026000781 remains the Commission's decision. There is no further right of
administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on this request.

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0124)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of
administrative appeal from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90)
calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official
Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission.
                                            4                               2026002278

The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such
requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph
titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                                     Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


August 25, 2026
Date
