           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                   Lyle S., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                               Frank Bisignano,
                                Commissioner,
                        Social Security Administration,
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024003565

                         Agency No. CHI-23-0912-SSA

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s May 16, 2024, final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a former Claims Specialist Trainee, GS-7 at the Agency’s
field office in Waukegan, Illinois. Complainant is a Black African-American of
Zimbabwean descent. He was a temporary employee under an Excepted
Service Appointment that included a two-year trial (probationary) period.
Complainant’s employment was effective from October 24, 2022 until
September 25, 2023, when he was terminated during his probationary period.
Report of Investigation (ROI) at 2-3.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                    2                            2024003565

An individual (Official 1 [Caucasian; American]) was a District Manager. ROI,
Exhibits Section (Ex) 7-4 at 2. A second individual (Official 2 [Caucasian;
American]) was also a District Manager and the former Operations Supervisor.
ROI Ex 7-2 at 2. Complainant’s first line supervisor (Supervisor 1 [declined to
self-identify; American]) was an Assistant District Manager. ROI 7-3 at 2.
Complainant’s back-up mentor (Witness [African-American; American]) was a
Claims Technical Expert. ROI, Ex 7-5 at 3.

Complainant initiated EEO contact on September 27, 2023. On November 20,
2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination by the
Agency on the bases of race (African-American) and national origin
(Zimbabwe) when on September 25, 2023, Complainant was terminated from
his Claims Specialist position, during his probationary period.

The Agency conducted an investigation. The investigation revealed that on or
around September 25, 2023, Complainant received written notice of
termination from Official 1. ROI, Ex 7-1 at 4 and 7-14. According to
Complainant, he was removed from federal service due to allegedly violating
the Agency‘s conduct policy regarding the use of government property at an
unauthorized alternate duty station. Complainant explained that the decision
to remove him from service alleges that he took the Agency‘s laptop to an
unauthorized alternate duty station to telework on Saturday, August 19, 2023,
without managerial approval or a signed telework agreement on file. ROI, Ex
7-1 at 4.

Complainant asserted that the basis within the termination notice was
inaccurate, stating that he had the right to take the laptop home and did so
because he received an email attachment that he needed to review and use
for guidance. Complainant also explained that when he tried to open the email
attachment at work, the laptop froze, and nothing worked. He stated that he
attempted to restart the email by repeatedly turning the computer off, but the
situation remained the same. According to Complainant, he took the laptop
home to use his personal secured Wi-Fi to open an email attachment which
opened without freezing. He stated that he briefly read the email he could not
open at work. Complainant also stated that when he returned to work on
Monday, Official 2 questioned him about why he took the laptop home and
why he did not respond to a Skype instant message. ROI, Ex 7-1 at 5.

Complainant stated that he informed Official 2 that he had the right to take
the laptop home; and that he explained that while trying to access email at
work, he could not open it.
                                      3                              2024003565

According to Complainant, Official 2 advised him that going through emails
outside of working hours is unacceptable, and management would assess the
situation to determine if there was a policy violation. ROI, Ex 7-1 p.6.

Complainant stated that he requested a copy of the policy from Official 2, and
after reading it, he found no suggestion that reading emails from home
without permission would be considered a violation of the policy. Complainant
asserted that when raising the concern to Official 2, Official 2 responded that
although the policy does not explicitly state that reading emails from home
violates the policy, it is still considered an unacceptable practice. Complainant
asserted that The Decision to Remove him from Federal Service also stated
that he had failed to make himself available via instant message (IM) (i.e.,
Skype or Microsoft Teams). It further alleged that Official 2 repeatedly spoke
to him regarding his failure to respond to IMs and emails on November 18,
2022, November 29, 2022, December 2, 2022, December 16, 2022, February
28, 2023, March 6, 2023, March 21, 2023, and May 19, 2023. Complainant
asserted that he did respond to IMs from management. ROI, Ex 7-1 at 5.

Complainant asserted that the decision letter also stated that he failed to meet
the expectations for the position. Complainant denied that he underperformed
as stated in the letter. Complainant also asserted that someone was using his
credentials to change his claims to undermine his ability to work with the
agency. According to Complainant, when he told his manager, the manager
responded that someone cannot enter the system using Complainant’s
credentials. ROI, Ex 7-1 at 6. Complainant alleged racial and national origin
discrimination as the reason for his termination, stating that Official 1 told him
that Complainant lacked the knowledge for the training, which Complainant
believed was racially motivated. Complainant also alleged that his national
origin played a role in the termination, as Official 2 stated that he had difficulty
understanding Complainant when he spoke. ROI, Ex 7-1 at 7-8.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge,
or a final decision from the agency. When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency
issued a final decision (FAD) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency
concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.
                                     4                             2024003565

On appeal, Complainant, among other things, argues that management
reinstated two trainee probationary Claims Specialists after allowing them
access to their Agency laptops to obtain information but did not afford him the
same opportunity; that a third Claims Specialist was not terminated after he
invited a customer to the office to correct a payment error; and that
management failed to provide the customer interaction transcripts on which
management based their determination that he was not meeting expectations.
We will address Complainant’s arguments below.

The Agency, in pertinent part, argued that its final decision should be affirmed.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).           See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and
relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the
Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the
three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). A complainant must initially
establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he/she was subjected to
an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the
particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. at 802 n.13. The burden then
shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
To ultimately prevail, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves
v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s
Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

Management denied Complainant’s allegations of discrimination, explaining
that Complainant was issued notice of termination on September 25, 2023
based on Complainant’s chronic conduct and performance issues.
                                   5                            2024003565

According to them, despite Complainant’s representation that he was
authorized to telework, Complainant never signed a telework agreement
allowing him to work from home. They stated that reviewing Agency emails
from locations that are not the employee’s official duty station requires a
signed telework agreement and prior approval from management.
Management stated that Complainant routinely failed to make himself
available to receive Ims. Management also cited examples of Complainant’s
unacceptable conduct, including that Complainant laughed at a member of the
public during an interview. As to Complainant expressed concern that
someone might be using his credentials to modify claims, management
explained that Complainant is solely responsible for safeguarding his
credentials since no one can access and change the claims without
Complainant’s permission. They pointed out that any changes made to the
records are documented with the individual’s personal identification number
(PIN), which is connected to their credential, and that the name of the person
who made the change would be recorded. See ROI, Ex 7-4 at 4-8; 7-2 at 3-
8; and 7-3 at 3-8.

Witness provided supporting statements, adding that no one can access an
employee’s computer except for the System Coordinator who requires
permission from the employee before accessing their computer. ROI, Ex 7-5
at 3-7.

The record is devoid of any evidence to supports a conclusion that
Complainant’s termination during the probationary period was motivated by
discriminatory animus based on his race and national origin. Nor did
Complainant provide evidentiary support for his allegations that any of his
managers stated that they could not understand when he spoke or made any
comment about his ability to speak English.

We note Complainant’s appeal argument which he was raising for the first
time, including that management denied him opportunities they afforded three
other employees. We are however unable to determine whether these were
proper comparators as Complainant did not provide evidence that they were
outside of his protected race and nationality bases, that they were under the
same supervisor as he or that they engaged in conduct similar to his.

In light of Complainant’s appeal arguments, we also note that the Agency
issued a FAD after no response from complainant following his receipt of the
ROI and notice of rights which the Agency asserted was delivered to him via
electronic mail on March 14, 2024. See Agency Appeal File at 280-81.
                                     6                             2024003565

Complainant could have requested a hearing to further develop the record or
have an AJ issue credibility determinations. Because Complainant did not
request a hearing or avail himself of the discovery process which would have
allowed for an examination of the credibility or lack thereof of the Agency’s
explanations, we can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the
evidence presented to us. We therefore find that Complainant has failed to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that similarly situated
comparators engaged in unacceptable conduct but received more favorable
treatment; and that management refused Complainant access to customer
transaction transcripts that he allegedly requested.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                     7                             2024003565

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs.
                                     8                             2024003565

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action,
you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit
the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney
directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 12, 2025
Date
