                                        2                             2025004249

when on November 4, 2024, she was placed on Emergency Placement, and
subsequently, on December 13, 2024, she was issued a notice of separation during
probationary period.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge or a final Agency decision. 29 C.F.R.
§1614.108(f). When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal
followed. Complainant submitted no argument on appeal.

Complainant began her full-time Sales, Services/Distribution Associate (SSDA)
position on November 2, 2024, subject to 90-day probationary period. Postmaster
stated that on November 4, 2024, he placed Complainant in Emergency Placement
because she verbally threatened her coworker (C1) (a SSDA), with physical
violence. C1 indicated that approximately at 6:50 am on November 4, 2025, C1
finished her scanning assignment but Complainant had not finished and had been
on her phone for more than 30 minutes. C1 told Complainant that they had to
finish scanning, Complainant had been on the phone, it was almost 7:00 a.m., and
the carriers would be here soon. In response, Complainant came around C1 and
said to C1 that she would “slap the shit out” of C1. A few other coworkers
witnessed the incident and stated that C1 was frustrated and just walked away from
Complainant after the incident. Based on the foregoing incident, Complainant’s
supervisor issued Complainant a Notice of Separation During Probationary Period,
dated December 12, 2024, for Unacceptable Conduct – Violent and Threatening
Behavior.

Upon review, we find that Complainant failed to provide any evidence to show that
the Agency’s articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the alleged
actions were pretextual. After a review of the record, we find no evidence showing
that the alleged incidents were motivated by discrimination or retaliation as
alleged.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.
                                         3                             2025004249

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           4                              2025004249

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025004249

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 24, 2026
Date
