           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Russel D., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                John Phelan,
                                 Secretary,
                           Department of the Navy,
                                  Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024002639

                      Agency No. DON 23-69450-01152

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s February 21, 2024 final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Contract Specialist, GS-1102-12, at the Naval Air Station
in Pensacola, Florida.

On August 23, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the
bases of race (Asian/Hispanic), national origin (Spanish/Hawaiian/Okinawan),
and reprisal (prior protected EEO activity) when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                 2                           2024002639

A. On or about April 25, 2022, Human Resources did not provide him
   with any orientation during his onboarding, union benefits nor any
   adequate training to do his job;

B. On or about August 1, 2022, his first-level supervisor (S1)
   (White/Caucasian, American/English/Irish) remarked, among other
   things, “you may not love me, but you will respect me,” likewise
   micromanaging his work and treating him like a child;

C. From August 2022 to July 2023, S1 assigned him extensive work
   assignments without any support, while he was the only contract
   specialist assigned in their office;

D. From August 2022 to July 2023, S1 verbally abused, constantly
   alienated, and belittled him, resulting in significant mental stress and
   negative impacts to his mental health, physical health and marital
   relationship;

E. On or about October 11, 2022, S1 called him into his office where he
   and a co-worker witnessed S1 write, “you [two] don’t deserve being
   GS-12s;”

F. On or about October 2022 through December 2022, S1 stated to
   Complainant, among other things, “you look crazy… [your] haircut
   was botched, is that what they do in Hawaii?” and “[your tattoos]
   must be a Hawaiian thing;”

G. On or about November 2022 through April 2023, management took
   no action to address S1 toxic work environment and harassment;

H. On or about May 1, 2023, management denied his request to move
   to a different trailer location to be away from S1;

I. On or about July 5, 2023, management did not formally announce
   his departure from the Agency or host a picnic for him as they did
   with other employees; and

J. On or about July 12, 2023, S1 denied his request for one day of
   telework while approving everyone else’s requests for a telework day
   and responded, “it is what it is.”
                                        3                           2024002639

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the Agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant
was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. Complainant then
filed the instant appeal.

We find that the alleged incidents, even assuming they occurred as described
by Complainant, were insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a
discriminatory hostile work environment. Furthermore, we find that the
conduct was not sufficiently material to deter protected activity.

In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the
alleged conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. For
example, co-workers confirmed that there were issues with onboarding for
new employees. S1 affirmed that Complainant had numerous avenues to
receive the assistance and training he needed. The record supports that the
office was understaffed and employees felt overworked. S1 stated that he
intended the comment about Complainant’s hair to be humorous; however,
he later learned his comments were inappropriate and he apologized. S1 was
instructed to not make any more inappropriate comments and there is no
evidence demonstrating that the conduct continued. Complainant’s initial
request to be moved to a different trailer was denied; however, management
stated that Complainant sat where he wanted on any given day and was not
required to return to his supervisor’s location. Management noted that
Complainant did have a farewell luncheon, but there was no standard policy
on those events. Management affirmed that Complainant’s request for
telework was denied because he was needed in the office to perform several
employee checkout/clearing procedures prior to his last day in the office.

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment
regarding his claims, Complainant has not proffered any evidence
demonstrating that the Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for
discrimination or reprisal.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.
                                       4                           2024002639

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.
                                        5                           2024002639

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                    Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations

September 23, 2025
Date
