                                        2                                2025000540


On January 12, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination
by the Agency on the bases of race (Asian), national origin (Philippines), color
(brown), age (over 40), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when she
was directed to report to work in the Cartographic Research Room to assist with
researchers despite her supervisors knowing of a history of harassment and
unprofessional taunts, and a coworker exhibited harassing and unprofessional
behavior toward Complainant when she slammed pink slips down forcefully on the
desk in front of Complainant and customers, then stated loudly and aggressively,
“she had them.”

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b).

In its decision, the Agency found that management articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its decision to assign Complainant to the Cartographic
Research Room. Specifically, the Research Room was short-staffed, and
management chose Complainant for this assignment because she had worked there
before and knew how to do the work. Management also stated that Complainant did
not express any objection to working in the Research Room at the time she received
the assignment and emphasized that while Complainant had accused coworkers of
harassing taunts in the past, none of her allegations were substantiated upon
investigation. The Agency ultimately found no evidence that this reasoning was
pretext for discrimination.

Regarding the claim that a coworker behaved in an unprofessional and harassing
manner when she slapped pink slips onto the desk in front of Complainant, the
Agency found that, directly after Complainant reported this incident, the coworker
was counseled and told that her behavior was unacceptable. Complainant admitted
that she was not assigned to work in the Cartographic Research Room further after
reporting the incident. The Agency found no basis for imputing liability to the
Agency, because management exercised reasonable care in promptly addressing the
alleged harassment as soon as they became aware of it.
                                         3                                 2025000540


Complainant then filed the instant appeal but did not submit a brief or raise any
arguments on appeal.

Upon review of the record, we find no evidence that the Agency acted with
discriminatory animus when it assigned Complainant to work in the Cartographic
Research Room or when Complainant’s coworker displayed unprofessional
behavior toward her. The Agency stated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
its actions and responded promptly and reasonably to address Complainant’s report
of harassment from her coworker. We find no indication that the Agency’s
explanations were pretext for discrimination. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.


                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                        4                                 2025000540


Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director,
Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular
mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail
addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible
postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs.
                                         5                                 2025000540


Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action, you
may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests
for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types
of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please
read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 24, 2026
Date
