           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Anton S., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                                 David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                         United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024000905

                        Agency No. 4G-700-0083-23

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s October 18, 2023, final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Sales, Services/Distribution Associate, Part
Time Flexible, P-06, at the Agency’s Luling Post Office facility in Luling,
Louisiana.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                           2024000905

On May 31, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency on the bases of sex (male), disability
(mental/physical), and age (47) when:

    2. On January 10, 2023, Complainant was sent home and charged Absent
       Without Leave (AWOL);

    3. On February 1, 2023, Complainant’s Postmaster told Complainant that
       he was ineligible for Wounded Warriors Leave (WWL); and

    4. On February 15, 2023, Complainant was notified that he was being
       terminated for not coming to work on February 13, 2023, but no
       disciplinary work has been submitted to Human Resources, and he is
       on postal rolls, but has not been scheduled to work since. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that
Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination
as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

On appeal, Complainant, among other things, argues that Postmaster’s
statement that she did not discuss Wounded Warrior Leave with him is
untrue; that he did not request a hearing because he did not access the
email in time to download the report, which would have informed him of the
hearing process; and the Agency did not interview his Supervisor despite
Complainant identifying Supervisor as someone who could support
Complainant’s claim.

2  Complainant initially included two additional allegations which were
dismissed by the Agency. Since Complainant does not specifically contest
the Agency’s procedural dismissals, we exercise our discretion to review only
those issues specifically raised in an appeal and will not address these issues
in this decision. See EEOC Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614,
(MD-110), Chap. 9, § IV.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (“Although the Commission has
the right to review all of the issues in a complaint on appeal, it also has the
discretion to focus only on those issues specifically raised on appeal.”). We
have maintained the claim numbering as set forth by the Agency.
                                       3                          2024000905

The Agency did not file a brief or statement in opposition to the appeal.

Based on a thorough review of the record before us, Complainant has not
presented adequate evidence to establish that the Agency was motivated by
his disability, age, or sex. Although Complainant asserted that he is a
veteran with a service-connected disability, he did not identify any specific
disability or limitations that would serve to establish he is an individual with
a disability within the meaning of the Regulations. However, even assuming
that Complainant had done so, the record contains sufficient evidence to
show that the Agency actions were based on legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reasons and Complainant did not establish that these reasons were pretext
for discriminatory motive.

We are not persuaded by Complainant’s argument on appeal because even
assuming Postmaster did tell Complainant she believed he was ineligible for
Wounded Warrior Leave, this is insufficient to establish pretext. We are also
not persuaded by Complainant’s statements that he did not access the email
in time to request a hearing and that his supervisor was not interviewed.
The Complainant shall at all times be responsible for proceeding with the
complaint whether or not he or she has designated a representative. 29
C.F.R. § 1614.605(e). Complainant has not specified what testimony
Supervisor would provide and how it would establish discrimination.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                        RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
                                      4                           2024000905

brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
                                       5                           2024000905

or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




_________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 19, 2025
Date
