            U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                           Office of Federal Sector
                               P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                    Edie R.,1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                   Sean Duffy,
                                    Secretary,
                          Department of Transportation
                        (Federal Aviation Administration),
                                     Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2024004986

                         Agency No. 2023-30123-FAA-02

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
August 8, 2024 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.,
and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29
U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the
Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events, giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Workforce Services Manager, FV-0301-K, with the Agency’s Business Services
Branch in Washington, D.C. On December 19, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO
1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2024004986

complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to discrimination and a hostile
work environment based on her race (African American), sex (female), color (black),
disability (mental and physical), age (52), and reprisal (prior protected EEO activity)
when:

      1. Since June 2021, and continuing to the present, management has subjected
         Complainant to harassing and bullying behavior to include keeping her
         from key management meetings and reassigning her staff without her
         approval;

      2. Since June 2021, management miscalculated Complainant’s retirement
         contribution and did not address the Thrift Savings Plan processing issue
         when requested; and

      3. On June 5, 2023, Complainant learned that management did not select her
         for a Special Projects Non-Supervisory internal reassignment position.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing within
the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that she was subjected to discrimination or reprisal
as alleged.

We find that the alleged incidents were not objectively severe or pervasive to
establish a discriminatory hostile work environment and not sufficiently material to
deter protected activity to establish a retaliatory hostile work environment.
Furthermore, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the alleged
conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. For example, with
respect to Claim 2, the record shows that Complainant’s salary was incorrectly
imputed by Human Resources and her Thrift Savings Plan contribution was
miscalculated due to an inputing error by the Shared Service Center in Atlanta,
Georgia. Additionally, once Complainant informed her supervisor about the issue,
the supervisor reached out to Human Resources to remedy the issue. With respect to
Claim 3, although Complainant’s supervisors considered the possibility of creating
a new position for Complainant (at Complainant’s request), upper management
decided creating a new position was not necessary.
                                           3                               2024004986

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment regarding
her claims, Complainant has not proffered sufficient evidence demonstrating that the
Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination or retaliation.

                                   CONCLUSION

Therefore, based on our review of the record, including Complainant’s arguments
on appeal, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
                                           4                              2024004986

request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2024004986

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 15, 2026
Date
