           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                  Rigoberto A., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                  Secretary,
                         Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                   Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025000858

                       Agency No. 200J-556A-2024-15677

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
November 7, 2024 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the
following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as an Administrative Officer at the Agency’s Captain James A. Lovell
Federal Health Care Center in Chicago, Illinois.         On February 29, 2024,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against
him on the basis of race (African American) when on November 29, 2023, and
December 29, 2023, he became aware of receiving incorrect ratings of “Fully
Successful” on his performance evaluation.

1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025000858

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a final agency
decision. The Agency issued a final decision finding that Complainant failed to
prove that he was subjected to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal
followed.

We find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the
rating. Complainant’s role as Administrative Officer required him to be responsible
for maintaining employee folders on all Pharmacy Department staff, assisting with
staff training to ensure all records are filed and prepared for disposition in
accordance with policy and conducting regular internal records reviews to ensure an
effective records management program is maintained. Complainant’s performance
appraisal plan contained four main elements, including “Personnel Management,”
which accounted for 25 percent of his employment duties and responsibilities. To
achieve a “Fully Successful” rating in this element, Complainant needed to ensure
that 90 percent of personnel files were fully compliant. At the end of the performance
period, only about 80 percent of Complainant’s files were fully compliant.
Complainant’s supervisor exercised leniency in assigning a “Fully Successful”
rating because if she had rated Complainant as “Unacceptable” on this element, his
overall performance rating would have been “Unacceptable.” Complainant has
presented no persuasive evidence demonstrating that the Agency’s reasons for the
rating were pretextual.

                                   CONCLUSION

Upon careful review of the final decision and the evidence of record, as well as the
parties' arguments on appeal, we AFFIRM the Agency's final decision.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
                                           3                               2025000858

      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                           4                              2025000858

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




_________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


April 23, 2026
Date
