           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Maxima S., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                 David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                         United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2023003009

                         Agency No. 4E-980-0060-22

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s March 28, 2023, final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Supervisor Customer Services, EAS-17, at the Agency’s
Lake Stevens Carrier Annex in Lake Stevens, Washington. Complainant’s first-
line supervisor was the Postmaster and her second-line supervisor was the
Manager, Post Office Operations (MPOO). Complainant sustained an on-the-
job injury which prevented her from performing the full functions of her
position.


1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                          2023003009

Her initial medical restrictions precluded lifting/carrying/pushing more than
five pounds; sitting for long periods of time; standing/walking for more than
one hour; and climbing ladder/stairs, twisting, bending/stooping,
squatting/kneeling, crawling, reaching, or lifting above shoulders.

On June 24, 2022, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination
by the Agency on the bases of disability (physical/on the job injury) and in
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity. Following amendments to the
complaint, the Agency accepted the following claims for investigation: 2

    1. On unspecified dates since March 9, 2022, management has not
       corrected clock ring discrepancies, causing her to be paid incorrectly.

    2. On March 9, 2022, her medical information was improperly discussed
       and shared.

    3. Beginning on March 9, 2022, and ongoing, she was worked outside of
       her restrictions.

    4. On March 22, 2022, she was given an investigative interview, and
       subsequently issued a Letter of Warning in Lieu of a 14-Day
       suspension.

    5. On April 7, 2022, management instructed her to complete afternoon
       reports and C360 inquiries within three hours.

    6. On or about April 12, 2022, management changed her scheduled day
       off without notifying her.

    7. In April 2022, management did not give her time to complete required
       training and instructed her to complete the C360 inquiries instead.




2
  We note that the Agency dismissed several other claims. Since Complainant
does not specifically contest the Agency’s procedural dismissals, we exercise
our discretion to review only those issues specifically raised in an appeal and
will not address these issues in this decision. See EEOC Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, (MD-110), Chap. 9, § IV.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (“Although
the Commission has the right to review all of the issues in a complaint on
appeal, it also has the discretion to focus only on those issues specifically
raised on appeal.”).
                                        3                           2023003009

Complainant    also  alleged  discriminatory   harassment/hostile    work
environment, beginning in March 2022, in reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity when:

   8. On July 4, 2022, she became aware that her request for access to the
      Change of Address Reporting System (COARS) Unit Supervisor in the
      eAccess System was withdrawn after her Postmaster failed to respond
      to the request in a timely manner.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ), or a final decision from the agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), which concluded that Complainant did not prove that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed
the instant appeal, challenging the Agency’s finding of no discrimination.

Having reviewed the record, we initially find that Complainant cannot prevail
on her denial of reasonable accommodation claim when she was allegedly
given work outside of her restrictions. Even assuming arguendo that
Complainant was an individual with a disability who was qualified for the
position that she held, we find that the probative evidence fails to show that
the Agency violated her restrictions. While we acknowledge that the record
contains witness statements attesting that the Postmaster worked
Complainant outside of her restrictions when the Postmaster, for example,
required Complainant to move boxes and drive a vehicle, we note that the
Postmaster vehemently denied Complainant’s allegations and emphasized
that employees are required to work within their medical restrictions. To the
extent that Complainant argued otherwise, the Postmaster stated that was
news to her and surmised that Complainant may decided on her own to work
outside of her restrictions. As Complainant did not request a hearing, we do
not have the benefit of an AJ’s credibility analysis to resolve the conflicting
evidence. Based on the evidence before us, we find that Complainant failed to
prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Agency knowingly worked
her outside of medical restrictions.

As for Complainant’s allegations of disparate treatment, we find that even if
Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination, the Agency
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
                                      4                          2023003009

For the claim that management failed to correct clock ring discrepancies, the
Agency attributed the delay in correcting the clock ring discrepancies to the
Postmaster working from open to close at the post office by herself, covering
two offices, while dealing with family issues. According to the Agency, the
Postmaster corrected the clock rings once she understood the discrepancies
and revised Complainant’s time in Pay Period 10.

Regarding the investigative interview and Letter of Warning in Lieu of a
14-Day Suspension, the Postmaster explained that Complainant was
disciplined because she failed to timely report her on-the-job accident
involving a metal gate. As for the alleged disclosure of Complainant’s
confidential medical records, the Postmaster explained that the Postmaster of
the Bow Post Office (Postmaster-2) was assisting her with completing the
internal investigation into Complainant’s accident, which required them to
reenact the accident and note Complainant’s injuries based on the medical
information provided by Complainant’s medical providers. They denied
improperly sharing or discussing Complainant’s confidential medical
information.

For the claim that management instructed Complainant to complete afternoon
reports and C360 inquiries within three hours, the Postmaster denied
Complainant’s allegations and explained that she never instructed
Complainant to complete afternoon reports and C360 inquiries within three
hours and noted there was no standard time to complete the tasks since each
case and station were different.

As to the claim that management did not give her time to complete required
training and instructed her to complete the C360 inquiries instead, the record
reveals that mandatory training was put in the HERO program at the beginning
of the year and all executive and administrative schedule employees were
given ample time until the completion date. Further, post offices were aware
that C360 cases were to be completed every morning, noon, and evening. The
Postmaster prioritized the completion of C360 cases over training and
explained that, as a supervisor, the onus was on Complainant to effectively
multitask, manage time, and not wait until the last minute to complete
training.

Regarding the allegation that the Postmaster changed her scheduled day off
from Monday to Wednesday during the week of April 12, 2022, without her
consent or knowledge, the Postmaster denied changing Complainant’s
scheduled day off without notifying her and stated the change was identified
in her job offer.
                                       5                           2023003009

Moreover, the Postmaster did not recall whether Complainant requested her
previous scheduled day off or conversations related to her scheduled day off.

For the claim that Complainant received an email notification that her COARS
Unit Supervisor access had been withdrawn by the eAccess system because
the request had been pending for more than 30 days, the Postmaster
explained that she inadvertently missed the email notification request for
approval due to performing additional jobs of supervisor and mail carrier.

Upon careful review of the Agency’s final decision and the evidence of record,
as well as the parties’ arguments on appeal, we conclude that the Agency
correctly determined that the preponderance of the evidence did not establish
that Complainant was discriminated against by the Agency as alleged.
Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                        6                           2023003009

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs.
                                       7                           2023003009

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action,
you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit
the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney
directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_______________________              Carlton M. Hadden’s signa
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 23, 2025
Date
