           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Vickie P., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                                 David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                         United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024000912

                        Agency No. 1C-531-0113-23

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s September 27, 2023, final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Maintenance Mechanic MPE at the Agency’s
Atlanta NDC facility in Atlanta, Georgia.

On May 31, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
when, on January 10, 2023, Complainant was bypassed for promotion to a
Maintenance Mechanic MPE Level 9 position.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                          2024000912

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that
Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination
as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

In the decision, the Agency determined that the information for the
promotion was placed into the Maintenance Automated Bid System, which
processed the forms submitted by the applicants and determined those
eligible for the position. Complainant had previously submitted a Promotion
Rejection Form in 2017 indicating that she indefinitely rejected promotion
opportunities that did not include certain days off. Management explained
that when the system changed into the Maintenance Automated Bid System,
Complainant should have turned in a form requesting to remove the
rejection form and sign the rejection form requesting for it to end or turn in
a new rejection form with changes that needed to be made. Management
stated that the only reason Complainant was bypassed for promotion was
because of the rejection form she had on file, so the system bypassed
Complainant and went on to the next eligible employee. Since Complainant
failed to show that she did not have a promotion rejection form on file, or
that she had filed the appropriate forms to remove or change it, she failed to
establish that the Agency’s actions were pretext for discrimination. As a
result, the Agency found Complainant was not subjected to discrimination as
alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at 9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).
                                      3                           2024000912

The Commission finds that Complainant failed to present any evidence
showing the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons that
Complainant was bypassed for promotion were pretext for retaliatory
animus. Complainant had a Promotion Rejection Form on file marked
indefinitely for certain days off days, so the system bypassed Complainant
and moved to the next eligible employee.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507.
                                       4                           2024000912

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests.
                                       5                           2024000912

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 26, 2025
Date
