          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                       Office of Federal Sector
                           P.O. Box 77960
                       Washington, DC 20013


                                    Cecile T., 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                  Secretary,
                         Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                   Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025002764

                       Agency No. 200P-640-2024-156302

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 14, 2025 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.
For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events, giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Medical Support Assistant at the Agency’s Palo Alto VA Medical Center-Menlo
Park in Palo Alto, California. On February 8, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO
complaint alleging that the Agency subjected her to discrimination and a hostile
work environment on the bases of disability (mental) and reprisal (prior protected
EEO activity) when:

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                           2025002764

      1.     Since December 13, 2022, Complainant’s supervisor failed to provide
             her with effective reasonable accommodation;

      2.     On December 19, 2022, Complainant’s supervisor removed
             unspecified aspects of her duties;

      3.     On December 22, 2022, Complainant’s supervisor rated her as “Fully
             Successful;”

      4.     On January 12, 2024, during a call with Complainant, the Assistant
             Nurse Manager informed Complainant that a coworker complained
             about Complainant’s work, spoke to Complainant in a threatening
             manner, told Complainant she was in trouble, and hung up on her;

      5.     On unspecified dates, the Assistant Nurse Manager told Complainant
             that she received many complaints about Complainant from other
             coworkers.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing within
the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that she was subjected to discrimination or reprisal
as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

We find that the alleged incidents were not objectively severe or pervasive to
establish a discriminatory hostile work environment and not sufficiently material to
deter protected activity to establish a retaliatory hostile work environment.
Furthermore, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the alleged
conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. For example,
Complainant’s supervisor stated that she removed duties from Complainant’s list of
assignments because Complainant had assumed duties that were not part of her
position.    Complainant received a “Fully Successful” rating because her
performance was at that level during the rating period. The Assistant Nurse Manager
informed Complainant’s supervisor of several performance and conduct concerns
regarding Complainant during the rating period.
                                           3                            2025002764

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment regarding
her claims, Complainant has not proffered sufficient evidence demonstrating that the
Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination or retaliation.

Finally, we find that the record demonstrates that the Agency did not deny
Complainant reasonable accommodation.                Complainant requested several
accommodations including, inter alia, tasks in writing; daily time for review of
unfamiliar tasks and new positions; previews of upcoming training information days;
additional time to complete training; flexible breaks; organizational systems; and
additional visual examples of expectations. Agency management offered several
alternative accommodations including adjusting Complainant’s assignments and
allowing additional training and professional development sessions. As discussed
above, Agency management removed tasks that were not part of Complainant’s
position; therefore, no additional training was necessary for those duties. The record
is devoid of evidence to establish that the alternative accommodations provided were
not effective. Accordingly, the record does not establish that the Agency failed to
accommodate Complainant in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

Therefore, based on our review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination or retaliation.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
                                           4                           2025002764

statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                           5                           2025002764

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




_________________________ Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


May 21, 2026
Date
