           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                Cherilyn C., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                               Marco Rubio,
                                Secretary,
                            Department of State,
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024000821

                          Agency No. DOS-0352-22

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s October 12, 2023, final decision concerning her equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Human Resources Program Coordinator, FP-
06, at the Agency’s Human Resources Section at the U.S. Embassy Doha in
Qatar.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                           2024000821

On October 21, 2022, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency on the bases of national origin (Hispanic and
Panamanian) 2, sex (female), disability (PTSD, bruxism, and nerve damage),
and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

    1. Complainant was not selected for the EPAP Human Resources position
       on July 19, 2022; and

    2. Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment
       characterized by, but not limited to, professional isolationism and
       public ridicule since as recently as July 17, 2022.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. After Complainant requested a final agency decision without a
hearing, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b).

The     Agency    found    that     management     articulated   legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Management explained that no one
was interviewed or selected for the EPAP position because a decision was
made not to fill the position at that time, and instead to pursue a
restructuring of the Human Resources section. Furthermore, the Agency
determined Complainant did not establish pretext.

Regarding the allegation of harassment, the Agency found, among other
things, that Complainant failed to establish a causal link between the alleged
harassment and her protected groups and/or protected EEO activity and the
alleged conduct was not severe or pervasive enough to constitute unlawful
harassment. Thus, the Agency found that Complainant was not subjected to
discrimination or a hostile work environment as alleged. 3 Complainant filed
the instant appeal.


2
  Complainant alleged that she was subjected to discrimination on the basis
of race, which she indicated was “Hispanic,” and national origin, which she
indicated was “Panamanian”. The Commission considers the term “Hispanic”
to be a description of an individual's national origin, not race. See Angela F.
v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2019003846 (Feb. 4, 2020).
3
  We note that the Agency dismissed Complainant’s bases of “class” and
“veteran status” finding that these matters did not state a claim.
                                     3                          2024000821

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at 9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

We find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
its actions and Complainant did not show that these reasons were pretext for
unlawful discrimination or retaliation. Regarding the alleged hostile work
environment, we find the alleged incidents were more likely the result of
personality conflicts and general workplace disputes and are therefore
insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a discriminatory hostile work
environment. In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to
show that the alleged conduct was based on discriminatory animus.

Based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including
those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                        RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
     1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
        material fact or law; or
     2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
          policies, practices, or operations of the agency.




Complainant did not dispute their dismissal on appeal and therefore we do
not consider them here.
                                      4                           2024000821

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                       5                           2024000821

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 4, 2025
Date
