           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Ricardo K., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                  Secretary,
                        Department of Veterans Affairs
                       (Veterans Health Administration),
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024002284

                     Agency No. 20DR-0010-2022-14720

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s January 24, 2024 final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Statistician, GS-13, in the National Surgery Office (NSO)
in Denver, Colorado. On August 23, 2022, Complainant filed (and later
amended) an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against
him and subjected him to a hostile work environment on the bases of race
(Black), national origin (Ethiopian), color (black), and reprisal (prior protected
EEO activity) as evidenced by multiple incidents including, inter alia, he was
denied the opportunity for a promotion; his notable and critical contributions

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024002284

were not included in his performance appraisal; he was set up to fail with
unrealistic assignments with impossible deadlines; management revoked
Complainant’s elevated privileges (EPs) without his knowledge; and he was
falsely accused of refusing instructions.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the Agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).

In the decision, the Agency first noted that only the claim related to
Complainant’s EP was a timely raised discrete act. The Agency found that
management articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions
regarding that claim. Specifically, the Agency determined that Complainant
conflated the alleged removal of his EPs with actual removal of his
administrative privileges (APs). Agency management removed APs for all
non-supervisory Statistical Team members, including Complainant, who did
not regularly perform oversight and review-related duties. The Agency took
this action in connection with an NSO information security assessment. The
Agency concluded that Complainant failed to show that this reason was
pretextual.

With regard to Complainant’s hostile work environment claim, the Agency
determined that the alleged conduct was insufficiently severe or pervasive to
establish a hostile work environment. Further, the Agency found that there
was no evidence demonstrating that the incidents were based on
discriminatory or retaliatory animus. As a result, the Agency concluded that
Complainant failed to show that he was subjected to discrimination or reprisal
as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

We find that the alleged incidents, even assuming they occurred as described
by Complainant, were more likely the result of routine supervision, personality
conflicts, and general workplace disputes and are therefore insufficiently
severe or pervasive to establish a discriminatory hostile work environment.
Furthermore, we find that the conduct was not sufficiently material to deter
protected activity. In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed
to show that the alleged conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory
animus.
                                       3                           2024002284

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment
regarding his claims, Complainant has not proffered any evidence
demonstrating that the Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for
discrimination or reprisal. Specifically, Complainant failed to rebut the
Agency’s explanation that he and other non-supervisory staff members had
their APs removed as a result of a security assessment which determined that
those employees did not regularly perform oversight and review-related
duties.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507.
                                        4                           2024002284

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests.
                                       5                           2024002284

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 22, 2025
Date
