           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Rosamaria F., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                       v.

                                  Pete Hegseth,
                                    Secretary,
                              Department of War
                           (Office of the Secretary), 2
                                     Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024004940

                      Agency No. 2023-WHSWHMO-065

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s May 3, 2024, final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Special Advisor at the Agency’s Office of Strategic
Initiatives, White House Military Office, in Washington, D.C.

1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
2
  Pursuant to Executive Order 14347, Restoring the United States Department
of War, issued on Sept. 5, 2025, the Department of Defense is to be known
as the Department of War. Any references in the record or decision to the
Department of Defense should be read interchangeably as the Department of
War.
                                      2                           2024004940

On August 29, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency on the basis of sex (female) and reprisal for
protected EEO activity when she was subjected to a hostile work environment
when, among other things, her supervisor, the Director of Strategic Planning
and Requirements (Director) did not provide her with necessary information
to do her job; removed her from various tasks; assigned her secretarial-type
tasks; directed that all tasks need to go through him for approval; and on
December 4, 2023, rejected her timecard submission for Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) without justification.

Complainant stated that the Director treated her unprofessionally, making her
feel unwelcome and not like a respected member of the team because he did
not provide her with enough guidance, subjected her to micromanagement,
cut her off in meetings, and assigned her secretarial-type duties. She asserted
that due to the Director’s hostile behavior, she suffered chronic migraines and
eventually left the Agency in December 2023. See Report of Investigation
(ROI) at 241-52. The Director stated that he and Complainant initially had a
good relationship but that after he expressed concerns about how she was
prioritizing her time, Complainant brushed him off and did not engage any
further and then after he raised his concerns to leadership, Complainant began
behaving disrespectfully and unprofessionally. See ROI at 666. He explained
that Complainant was spending the majority of her time doing work for others
and therefore not making sufficient progress on areas in her core portfolio.
See ROI at 681. He stated that he only provided feedback and suggestions
as part of trying to foster a collaborative environment, but Complainant
became hostile and aggressive. See ROI at 685-87. He asserted that in
September 2023, Complainant sent an email telling him that she would be on
leave for 1-2 months and that she would be transferring her duties to other
staff members, at which point he responded by directing Complainant that
work needed to go through him because internal transfer of tasks is a
management responsibility and Complainant should not have moved tasks to
other staff members without his knowledge or approval. See ROI at 702-703.
He explained that he rejected Complainant’s requests for leave extending past
December 2, 2023 because Complainant had previously sent him an email
informing him that she would be leaving the Agency with her last day identified
as being December 1, so he thought that at the time, he was no longer her
supervisor and therefore did not have the authority to approve her leave. See
ROI at 709-710.
                                        3                           2024004940

The Special Assistant to the President (Special Assistant) stated that she was
made aware of communication issues between Complainant and the Director
and worked with Human Resources to set up alternative dispute resolution to
help improve the issues but after an initial meeting, Complainant refused to
participate further. See ROI at 732. Two of Complainant’s co-workers denied
that the Director ever treated Complainant unprofessionally but stated that in
contrast, Complainant’s behavior towards the Director was noticeably abrupt
and “short,” cutting him off in meetings and giving very brief, uninformative
answers to his questions. See ROI at 746-47; 752-54.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge,
or a final decision from the agency. When Complainant requested a final
Agency decision, the Agency issued a final decision that concluded that
Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as
alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

On appeal, Complainant reiterates that she was subjected to harassment and
that the Agency’s decision did not adequately consider all the facts. The
Agency filed a brief in response, urging that its decision be affirmed.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).           See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and
relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the
Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

We find that Complainant did not establish that she was subjected to unlawful
harassment. To begin with, the record reflects that all the incidents of alleged
harassment amount to little more than the result of routine supervision,
managerial discipline, and general workplace disputes which do not rise to the
level of severe or pervasive conduct to establish a hostile work environment.
See Marcie la P. v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, EEOC Appeal No. 0120141945
(Oct. 21, 2016). There is nothing in the record beyond Complainant’s
unsupported assertions that any of the incidents were due to a protected class.
                                        4                            2024004940

At best, the evidence in the record indicates that there was a personality
conflict between Complainant and the Director and their respective
communication styles but the Commission has repeatedly stated that such
personality conflicts and disputes about management styles is not sufficiently
severe or pervasive to rise to the level of unlawful harassment. See Karren N.
v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 0520180214 (Dec. 18, 018);
Complainant v. Dep’t of Def., EEOC Appeal No. 0120122676 (Dec. 18, 2014)
(The record established that the issues between the complainant and the
supervisor were because of personality conflicts and fundamental
disagreements over how work should be done and how employees should be
supervised, and there is no indication that the supervisor was motivated by
discriminatory animus towards the complainant's race, sex. or age). In
addition, to the extent Complainant insists she was harassed because the
Director’s treatment caused her to suffer chronic migraines, we reject
Complainant’s argument as it is well settled that unlawful harassment is not
established from insufficiently severe or pervasive conduct merely because a
complaint alleges physical and/or emotional injury. See Jess P. v. U.S. Postal
Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120161001 (April 19, 2016). Finally, Complainant’s
subjective perception of the Director’s treatment is not sufficient to satisfy the
objective standard required to establish unlawful harassment. See Carl T. v.
Social Security Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 2022000277 (Jan. 5, 2023) (stating
Title VII is not a civility code and forbids only behavior so objectively offensive
as to alter the conditions of the victim's employment); Mattson v. Dep't of
Homeland Sec'y, EEOC Appeal No. 0120052563 (July 3, 2007) (stating that a
hostile work environment is established by an objective standard and not a
complainant’s subjective perceptions).

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
                                        5                           2024004940

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision.
                                       6                           2024004940

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that
person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the
dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work.
If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s sgnature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 8, 2025
Date
