           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Doretta F., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                         United States Postal Service
                         (Field Offices and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024001634

                         Agency No. 1C-131-0133-23

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s November 27, 2023 final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Supervisor, Maintenance Operations at the
Agency’s Processing and Distribution Center in Wallingford, Connecticut.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                          2024001634

On May 15, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against her on the basis of disability (Physical) as
evidenced by multiple incidents including, inter alia, that management sent
out a mass email containing her medical condition; management falsified a
government document and failed to provide her reasonable accommodation;
her signature was forged; her time was improperly input; and management
shared information about her with individuals without a need to know.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded
that Complainant did not prove that she was subjected to discrimination as
alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

We find that the alleged incidents, even assuming they occurred as
described by Complainant, were more likely the result of routine supervision,
personality conflicts, and general workplace disputes and are therefore
insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a discriminatory hostile work
environment. In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to
show that the alleged conduct was based on discriminatory animus. For
example, the record demonstrates Complainant’s personal and confidential
medical information was not shared with anyone improperly. The emails in
question were related to Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request
and coding her absences in the Agency’s time and attendance system.
Therefore, we find no violation of the Rehabilitation Act.           The Lead
Maintenance Manager affirmed that all the statements he made on the
document in question were true to his knowledge. The Labor and Relations
Specialist affirmed that the signature on the form looked like Complainant’s,
and she had no reason to believe it was not Complainant’s signature.
Finally, Complainant’s time was entered as “Leave Without Pay – Suspension
Pending Termination” because Complainant never called in to request leave.
Complainant has not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the
Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination.

Finally, regarding Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request, the
record demonstrates that Complainant could not perform the duties of her
position.   The District Reasonable Accommodation Committee (DRAC)
searched for a vacant, funded position within Complainant’s restrictions.
                                      3                           2024001634

The DRAC informed Complainant that it had located several positions
however, Complainant did not respond to the DRAC’s notice. As a result, the
DRAC closed Complainant’s case. Accordingly, the Commission finds that
the Agency did not deny Complainant reasonable accommodation in violation
of the Rehabilitation Act.
Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
                                       4                           2024001634

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests.
                                       5                           2024001634

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 2, 2025
Date
