           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Melvin S., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                               Marco Rubio,
                                Secretary,
                            Department of State,
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2025002746

                          Agency No. DOS-0239-24

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s April 30, 2025, final decision concerning his equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Passport Specialist, GS-11 at the Agency’s
Buffalo Passport Agency (BPA), Department Asset Security for Passport
Services, Bureau of Consular Affairs in Buffalo, New York.

On May 28, 2024, Complainant filed a formal complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency on the bases of national origin (Moldova),
religion (Christian), age (45/46), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                          2025002746

activity under an EEO statute that was unspecified in the record when on
April 23, 2024, he learned that he was not selected to the two Supervisory
Passport Specialist positions (GS-12) for which he applied. 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a
hearing   before     an    Equal    Employment     Opportunity  Commission
Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. Complainant
requested a final agency decision, which the Agency issued pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant did not
prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

On appeal, Complainant argues, among other things, that two of his
allegations were improperly dismissed for untimely EEO contact; that the
Agency failed to consider relevant testimony and evidence, including
evidence proving that he engaged in prior protected activity; that retaliation
can be inferred from the Agency’s inconsistent reasons for his non-selection;
that the record includes direct evidence of retaliation in the form of a
management official’s admission that Complainant as not selected due to
past complaints involving one of the panelists; and that the wide disparity
among scoring and the composition of the panel establish disparate
treatment.

In addition to reiterating arguments made in its final decision, the Agency
responds to some of Complainant’s contentions on appeal. The Agency
notes, for example, that even if Complainant could establish that he engaged
in prior protected activity of which the relevant management officials were
aware, there is no evidence that it motivated the non-selections, particularly
given that the management official Complainant claims held a retaliatory
animus against him was the official who recommended that he be brought
back to the agency after he left.


2
   Complainant also alleged that he was denied two other promotions but
these allegations were dismissed as untimely raised with an EEO Counselor.
On appeal, Complainant asserts that he was “never informed that I could
request a waiver or exemption” and that, had he known, he “would have
exercised that right.” We note, however, that the notice dismissing these
allegations explained that he could appeal the dismissal of the allegations
once final action was taken on the rest of the complaint.
                                      3                          2025002746

It further argues that assuming Complainant established a prima facie case
of national origin, religion, or age discrimination (with arguments as to why
he did not), the Agency articulated a legitimate explanation which he failed
to establish was pretextual, even considering the arguments he makes on
appeal. The Agency notes that his reliance on the wide disparity in the
scores given to him by panelists does not support a finding of discrimination.
It further argues that even if Complainant could show that the selection
process was flawed or involved favoritism, that would not establish that his
non-selections were motivated by discrimination.

Dismissed Allegations

The Agency’s decision to dismiss a complaint is subject to de novo review by
the Commission, which requires the Commission to examine the record
without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the previous
decision maker and issue its decision based on the Commission’s own
assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405(a). The Commission should construe the complaint in the light
most favorable to the complainant and take the complaint’s allegations as
true. See Cobb v. Department of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05970077
(March 13, 1997). Thus, all reasonable inferences that may be drawn from
the complaint’s allegations must be made in favor of the complainant.

The record discloses that on April 23, 2024, Complainant initiated contact
with an EEO Counselor, alleging that he was discriminated against when he
was not selected for four positions. The Agency dismissed the allegations
involving the first two non-selections for untimely Counselor contact. The
record establishes that Complainant learned about the first non-selection on
March 28, 2023, almost a year before his Counselor contact, and the second
on March 8, 2024, 46 days before his Counselor contact.

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. §1614.105(a)(1) provides that an aggrieved
person must initiate contact with an EEO Counselor within forty-five (45)
days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of
a personnel action, within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of the
action. EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2) provides for the
dismissal of complaints where the complainant did not initiate contact with
an EEO Counselor within forty-five (45) days of the date of the matter
alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case of a personnel action, within 45
days of the effective date of the action.
                                      4                          2025002746

The Commission has adopted a “reasonable suspicion” standard (as opposed
to a “supportive facts” standard) to determine when the 45-day limitation
period is triggered. See Junior T. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
2023002297 (Apr. 27, 2023) (citing Howard v. Dep't of the Navy, EEOC
Request No. 05970852 (Feb. 11, 1999)). Thus, the time limitation is not
triggered until a Complainant reasonably suspects discrimination, but before
all the facts that support a charge of discrimination have become apparent.

Complainant asserted that the reason he did not contact an EEO Counselor
sooner was because he gave the management team “the benefit of the
doubt” and only when he was not selected for two additional positions did he
realize that something “was not right” about it. Complainant has not
provided sufficient justification for extending or tolling the time limit.
Complainant’s history with the BPA, specifically, his Exit Interview
Questionnaire outlining numerous concerns with management officials still in
charge of the office, along with his non-selection by those same officials for
two positions for which he asserts he had superior qualifications than the
selectees, establish that Complainant had sufficient knowledge to form a
reasonable suspicion that discrimination could have motivated his non-
selections in time to contact an EEO Counselor in a timely fashion.       The
Agency properly dismissed these two allegations for untimely EEO Counselor
contact.

Merits

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).        See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at 9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the
three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).
                                      5                          2025002746

A complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating
that he was subjected to an adverse employment action under
circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco
Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie
case will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell
Douglas, 441 U.S. at 804 n.14. The burden then shifts to the agency to
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep’t
of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail,
a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson
Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v.
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

Retaliation

To     establish  a prima facie case of retaliation, a   complainant    must
demonstrate that: (1) he participated in EEO activity; (2) an Agency
official(s) was aware of the protected activity; (3) a subsequent adverse
action took place, and (4) there is a causal link between the adverse action
and the employer's knowledge of protected activity. Nida R. v. Dep't of Def.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120152884 (Apr. 22, 2016) (internal citations
omitted); see also EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Retaliation and Related
Issues, § II.C.2, n. 154 (Aug. 25, 2016) (citing Henry v. Wyeth Pharm., 616
F.3d 134, 148 (2d Cir. 2010)).

Here, Complainant asserted that his claim of reprisal is based on his 2018
hostile work environment complaint to the Agency’s Office of the
Ombudsman and statements made in his August 17, 2018 Exit Interview.
Complainant argued that in both communications, he complained about the
hostile work environment created by one of the members of the interview
panel (Assistant Director, BPA/RMO2) and that the other two members of
the interview panel (Director, BPA/RMO1 and Adjudication Manager,
BPA/RMO3) were aware of this fact. The Agency, in response, noted that
although Complainant’s Exit Interview Questionnaire detailed problems he
had with RMO2, it did not suggest that any of these problems were related
to a basis protected by EEO laws or in any way indicate an opposition to any
practice made unlawful under the EEO laws. It also asserted that there is no
record of Complainant filing a complaint with the Ombudsman.

A review of the Exit Interview itself confirms the Agency’s description.
Complainant provided a great deal of information about his difficulties with
RMO2, but nowhere mentioned anything having to do with EEO laws.
                                      6                          2025002746

For example, he noted that RMO2 was “quick to criticize without providing
clear guidance;” and had a “often closed door policy and unpredictable
mood;” and stated that he would have liked “to have a fair work
environment with no favoritism or fraternization for all levels of
management” and that the least satisfying part of the job was “[n]ot being
allowed to make decisions, being micromanaged, not receiving enough
proper training and coaching. Unapproachable adjudication manager and her
closed-door policy.” He further stated that “[RMO2] was reluctant to share
any new information with all supervisors equally. Overall, it was difficult to
communicate with [RMO2] because of her unapproachable attitude, which
created a communication gap and unnecessary tensions. It was hard to
come to work every day due to the feeling of "walking on eggshells." I never
knew what to expect due to [RMO2’s] unpredictable mood and her
appearance of extreme busyness [stet].” RMO1 acknowledges that he had
read this Exit Interview Questionnaire. Although this documentation
establishes that Complainant raised concerns about RMO2’s behavior and
supervisory style, and that RMO1, at least, was aware of this history, the
record does not establish that Complainant opposed practices made unlawful
by EEO laws in this Exit Interview Questionnaire, given the lack of any
mention of EEO-related concerns.

As for Complainant’s communication with the Ombudsman, Complainant did
not dispute the Agency’s assertion that he did not file a complaint. Instead,
Complainant indicated that in March 2018, he talked with someone from that
office on the phone about his concerns and later followed up with an email.
The record contains an email chain from March 2018 between Complainant
and the Office of Ombudsman but, again, nothing in the email indicates that
the concerns Complainant raised were EEO-related. Moreover, there is
nothing to suggest that RMO1, RMO2, or RMO3 were aware that
Complainant had reached out to the Office of Ombudsman, even assuming
that he opposed practices made lawful by EEO laws when he did so. All
three RMOs deny being aware of this conversation and nothing in the record
suggests otherwise.

In attempting to establish a prima facie case of reprisal, Complainant also
relied on the affidavit of the former Assistant Director, BPA (AD1), who was
involved in trying to resolve problems between Complainant and RMO2 in
2018. According to AD1, in 2018 when Complainant told RMO1 and AD1
that he wanted to step down as a supervisor because of his difficult
relationship with RMO2, AD1 volunteered to “get involved between”
Complainant and RMO2 to “try to improve the situation” and thereafter
began “intense counseling sessions” with RMO2.
                                      7                          2025002746

AD1 asserted that in 2018 both he and Complainant believed that the
problems Complainant was having with RMO2 were at least partially because
Complainant was a male “with a different national origin” than others in the
office. In addition to outlining his awareness of difficulties that many males
in the office had with working with RMO2, AD1 testified that RMO2 “was a
very difficult individual for many people,” that many complained about her
“moodiness” and her friendly relationship with RMO1, and that RMO1
protected RMO2 “and her bullying and her unprofessional conduct.” AD1
also asserted that he talked with RMO1 numerous times about the concerns
he and Complainant had with her conduct, but that RMO1 did not listen
because of his friendly relationship with RMO2.

Even assuming that Complainant raised concerns of sex and national origin-
based harassment with AD1, all three responsible management officials deny
being aware of this prior EEO activity.      RMO2 acknowledged that he was
aware of the concerns Complainant raised about RMO2’s behavior but
asserted that it was never brought to his attention that any of these
concerns involved discrimination or harassment. Instead, RMO2 believed
that Complainant’s concerns related to being “micromanaged and ignored,”
in addition to feeling that RMO2’s moody, unavailable, and did not provide
sufficient guidance, as outlined in the Exit Interview Questionnaire.

Had Complainant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge, the
Administrative Judge could have made credibility determinations based on
witness testimony. See generally EEO MD-110, at Ch. 7. As Complainant did
not request for a hearing, we do not have the benefit of an Administrative
Judge's credibility determinations after a hearing; therefore, we can only
evaluate the facts based on the weight of the evidence presented to us.
Although Complainant and AD1 asserted that the concerns Complainant
raised about RMO2 in 2018 including concerns about harassment of males
and those of “different” national origins, all three RMOs deny knowing that
Complainant opposed practices made unlawful by EEO laws or otherwise
engaged in prior protected EEO activity. Based on the record before us, we
find that while RMO1 (and perhaps other responsible management officials)
was aware that Complainant raised concerns about RMO2’s alleged bullying
and poor supervisory methods, we are not persuaded that Complainant has
shown that any relevant management official was aware that the complaints
he raised about RMO2 in 2018 involved opposition to practices made
unlawful by EEO laws. He therefore failed to establish a prima facie case of
retaliation.
                                      8                         2025002746

Discrimination Based on Age, National Origin, or Religion

Even assuming Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination
based on age, national origin, or religion,   the Agency articulated a
legitimate nondiscriminatory reason which Complainant has failed to
establish is a pretext for discrimination.

In general, the Agency explained that Complainant was not selected because
he ranked lower than the three selected individuals after the interviews were
conducted. 3 After asking each interviewee the same questions, the interview
panel, made up of RMO1, RMO2, and RMO3, scored the candidate based on
the interview and the demonstrated qualifications and experience within
each resume. Complainant ranked seven out of eleven. Each of the three
RMOs provided an explanation for why they ranked Complainant and the
selectees the way they did.

RMO1 testified that the main difference between Complainant and the
selected candidates was that the selected candidates had more supervisory
experience in their background. In explaining her scoring of candidates,
RMO2 likewise mentioned the years of supervisory experience of the
selectees, but also focused on the specific supervisory skills demonstrated
by their answers to interview questions.         One selectee, for example,
demonstrated how his established management style specifically prioritized
people and relationships, as well as mission. Another demonstrated mastery
of a supervisor’s ability to assign and review the work of subordinates and a
dedication to empowering subordinates to accept change, work with
technology, and look to the future, so none are left behind. The final
selectee gave responses reflecting a customer service driven purpose, but
also a desire to help subordinates develop necessary skills to adapt to
change. Compared to these candidates, RMO2 noted that Complainant’s
interview responses were acceptable but generic; and that while his answers
sometimes included an example, he did not use the examples to his
advantage to show how a supervisory skill was used in the past. RMO3
testified that although Complainant and the selectees had similar
qualifications and experience, the selectees consistently gave thoughtful and
detailed answers to the interview questions, whereas Complainant’s answers
were often short and lacking in detail.

3
  Originally, two of the interviewed candidates were selected but when one
of those candidates left soon after, the Agency’s Human Resources office
reopened the same certificate and a third of the interviewed candidates was
chosen.
                                     9                            2025002746

RMO3 further testified that when Complainant asked him for feedback on
why he wasn’t selected, he told Complainant that he would have ranked
higher if he had provided more detail and examples of his experience.

In sum, therefore, the Agency explained that Complainant was not selected
because the selectees had more supervisory experience and provided better
and more detailed answers during the interview. The Agency has therefore
articulated a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s non-
selections.

In attempting to establish that this explanation         is   a   pretext   for
discrimination, Complainant makes several arguments.

Complainant argues that despite the Agency’s claim that the selectees were
hired due to having more supervisory experience, he had more relevant
supervisory experience in that he served as a supervisor in BPA while the
selectees’ supervisory experience came from outside the Agency. Although
it is true that Complainant had experience as a supervisor in BPA, his belief
that this makes his supervisory experience more relevant does not render
the Agency’s asserted reliance on the fact that the selectees had more years
of supervisory experience pretextual, even if this experience was at a
different agency.

Complainant also points to a discussion he had with RMO1 after Complainant
learned he was not selected for either position. Although Complainant and
RMO1 describe this conversation somewhat differently, they agree that when
Complainant asked why he was not selected despite his years of experience
and qualifications, RMO1 first mentioned supervisory experience but, when
Complainant then asked if his non-selection was based on the way he
departed the BPA in 2018, RMO1 provided additional details. RMO1 himself
acknowledge that he told Complainant that “one consideration in any hiring
decision is how well a new member of the management team will be able to
work with the existing members of the team.”      It is also undisputed that
RMO1 told Complainant that when RMO1 and RMO2 rehired Complainant in
2021, 4    they were met with skepticism and unhappiness from some
management team members who had been colleagues of Complainant when

4
  The record establishes that RMO1 and RMO2 were directly involved in
rehiring Complainant after he had raised concerns about RMO2 and, to a
lesser extent, RMO1, in his Exit Interview Questionnaire in 2018. Indeed,
Complainant acknowledged that it was RMO2 who suggested he be rehired
under a special hiring authority in 2021.
                                       10                          2025002746

he worked at BPA in 2018 during a time when there was conflict in the
adjudication unit because these team members “did not wish to see a
possible return to the earlier type of conflict.”

We are unable to conclude that Complainant has established by a
preponderance of the evidence that discrimination based on his age, national
origin, or religion motivated the non-selections. We note that at least two of
the selectees were older than Complainant. Moreover, although he is of a
different national origin and, possibly, religion, then the selectees, the record
is devoid of any evidence to suggest that these protected bases factored into
the promotion decisions. Instead, in addition to being motivated by the
supervisory experience and superior interviews of the selectees, at least one
of the selecting officials (RMO1) factored Complainant’s past complaints
about and conflicts with RMO2 into the selection decisions. Had Complainant
been able to prove that RMO1 was aware that the concerns Complainant
raised about RMO2 in the past involved discrimination or harassment made
unlawful by the EEO laws, he may have been able to establish that the
Agency’s articulated explanation for its selections was a pretext for
retaliation. But, as explained in detail above, even assuming Complainant
opposed practices made unlawful by the EEO laws during his discussions
with AD1 or otherwise, he failed to establish that the responsible
management officials were aware of this prior protected activity. Given the
record at hand, we must conclude that Complainant failed to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence that his non-selections were discriminatory.

We AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination, as well as
its dismissal of the two dismissed allegations.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                         RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.
                                      11                          2025002746

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision.
                                       12                           2025002746

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint
the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying
that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in
the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which
you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 8, 2025
Date
