          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                        Office of Federal Operations
                               P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                 Colby S, 1
                               Complainant,

                                    v.

                            Douglas A. Collins,
                                Secretary,
                      Department of Veterans Affairs
                     (Veterans Health Administration),
                                 Agency.

                         Appeal No. 2023005205

                   Agency No. 200P-593-2022-146698

                                DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s September 20, 2023, final decision concerning his equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)   complaint    alleging  employment
discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of
1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a General Surgeon, GS-15, at the Agency’s
Health Care facility in North Las Vegas, Neveda. On September 16, 2022,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination by the Agency on
the basis of age (51) when since February 3, 2019, he has been paid less
than his younger coworker. 2

1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
2
  The Agency’s final decision noted that Complainant alleged sex as a basis
for discrimination. However, we note that the record reflects, as confirmed
                                     2                          2023005205

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a
hearing   before     an    Equal    Employment     Opportunity    Commission
Administrative Judge (AJ), or a final decision from the agency. In accordance
with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant did not
prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

Upon review, we find that the Agency has articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. The Agency explained that the
named comparator was afforded more compensation due to her higher
market pay rate resulting from her professorships and research grants,
among other things. Complainant has not demonstrated that the Agency's
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the pay difference were pretext for
discrimination due to his age. We find that Complainant has not established
a connection between the Agency’s actions and his age or that the Agency
was motivated by discriminatory animus. We note that because Complainant
did not request a hearing, we do not have the benefit of an AJ's credibility
determinations and can only evaluate the facts based on the weight of the
evidence presented.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision finding no discrimination.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                      RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
     1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
        material fact or law; or
     2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
          policies, practices, or operations of the agency.




by Complainant on appeal, that Complainant is alleging that he was
subjected to discrimination based on his age and not sex.
                                      3                           2023005205

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision.
                                        4                           2023005205

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint
the person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying
that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in
the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which
you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing
a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 15, 2025
Date
