          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                       Office of Federal Sector
                           P.O. Box 77960
                       Washington, DC 20013


                                  Stanton S.,1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                  Secretary,
                        Department of Veterans Affairs
                       (Veterans Health Administration),
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2025000255

                     Agency No. 200H-646A-2023-153280

                                  DECISION

On October 18, 2024, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(a), from the Agency’s September 19, 2024, final decision concerning his
equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment
discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission REVERSES in part and AFFIRMS in part the Agency’s
final decision.

                             ISSUE PRESENTED



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2025000255

Whether the Agency correctly found that it had violated the Rehabilitation Act by
not providing Complainant with a reassignment as a form of reasonable
accommodation and whether the Agency subjected him to discrimination when it
issued a notice of proposed removal.

                                BACKGROUND

Prior to the events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Plumber
at the Agency’s Oakland Medical Center (University Drive) in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that he was subjected
to a hostile work environment due to his race, disability, and reprisal for prior
protected activity. On appeal, the Commission found that he established that he
was subjected to race-based harassment and ordered, among other things, that the
Agency reassign Complainant to a Plumber position or a substantially equivalent
position at the Heinz Campus VA Medical Center. The Commission further noted
that Complainant could not be reassigned to work at the University Drive facility
or with any of his former co-workers again. See Stanton S. v. Dep’t of Veterans
Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120170582 (Apr. 16, 2019). Pursuant to the
Commission’s order in that appeal, Complainant was offered and accepted a
position as a Plumber at the Agency’s Heinz Campus VA Medical Center in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he started on July 22, 2019.

In June 2020, Complainant filed another EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected him to retaliatory harassment and on appeal, the Commission found that
the Agency had subjected Complainant to retaliatory harassment for which the
Agency was liable. See Stanton S. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No.
2022001199 (Oct. 11, 2022). The Commission ordered the Agency to pay
compensatory damages, restore any leave Complainant took because of the
harassment and compensate Complainant for any Leave Without Pay taken as a
result of the harassment.

On October 25, 2023, Complainant filed the current EEO complaint alleging that
the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of disability (PTSD) and
reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under Section 501 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 when:

      1.    Since March 12, 2021, and as recently as October 18, 2023,
            Complainant’s reasonable accommodation request was denied; and,
                                         3                             2025000255

      2.     On June 7, 2023, Complainant received a proposed removal.

As a result of the post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and depression
that Complainant was diagnosed with due to the Agency’s repeated acts of
harassment, his doctor stated that Complainant can no longer work at any VA
facility. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 80. On May 21, 2020, Complainant
requested a reasonable accommodation of reassignment to another position that
was fully remote in order to accommodate his disability. See ROI at 82; 263. The
Human Resources Specialist in charge of reasonable accommodation (HR
Specialist) conducted a number of searches for available vacant positions
beginning on October 5, 2020, with the final search occurring on February 12,
2023. See Supplemental Report of Investigation (Supp. ROI) at 18; ROI 274-298.
At the conclusion of those searches, on February 21, 2023, the Agency issued a
final accommodation determination, noting that Complainant’s request was being
administratively closed because the Agency had not been able to find a vacant
position within Complainant’s limitations for which Complainant was qualified.
See ROI at 307.

Complainant thereafter received a memorandum dated May 31, 2023, notifying
him that the Agency proposed to remove him from his employment due to his
“medical inability to perform the essential functions of [his] position.” See ROI at
342-45. The Chief of the Facilities Management Service (Service Chief) stated
that he issued the memorandum due to Complainant’s not being able to work for
several years and the inability to find a suitable position for his reassignment. See
ROI at 157. He asserted that the Medical Center Executive Director (Executive
Director) decided to rescind the proposed removal. 2 See ROI at 157-58l; 355. The
memorandum dated July 14, 2023, rescinding the proposed removal informed
Complainant that the Agency would conduct an additional search for a vacant
position into which Complainant could be reassigned. See ROI at 355. In August
and September 2023, the Agency conducted an additional search for a vacant
position for Complainant but concluded that it was unable to find a fully remote
position for which Complainant was qualified. See ROI at 353.

Following the Agency rescinding its proposed removal, Complainant filed for
retirement, alleging constructive discharge.
2
  The Executive Director was not interviewed at any point during either the initial
investigation or the supplemental investigation.
                                         4                            2025000255


At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ).
Complainant requested a final Agency decision. However, before the Agency had
issued the final decision, the Agency determined that a supplemental investigation
was necessary and conducted a second investigation.

After the supplemental investigation was completed, the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency’s decision concluded
that the Agency satisfied its obligations under the Rehabilitation Act in conducting
its ultimately unsuccessful search for a position to reassign Complainant from 2020
to early 2023 and that the proposed removal due to medical inability was not
discriminatory because it was issued after the Agency conducted several
unsuccessful searches for a new position reassignment. The decision further
found, however, that Complainant did establish that he was denied reasonable
accommodation with respect to the Agency’s failure to offer Complainant a vacant
position as a Transportation Assistant in October 2023 even though an HR
Specialist agreed that Complainant met the minimum qualifications for the
position. The decision found that the Agency did not act in good faith because it
failed to inform Complainant that he was found to be qualified for that position.
The Agency further found that the HR Specialist accepted without question the
assertion that the Transportation Assistant position could not be conducted
remotely without conducting the individualized assessment required in order to
demonstrate that allowing Complainant to work remotely would constitute an
undue hardship. Among other things, the Agency ordered training for the HR
Specialist and stated that it would conduct a supplemental investigation into
Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages and attorney’s fees.

Complainant appealed the Agency’s final decision.

                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant argues the Agency erred in finding the Agency satisfied
its obligations under the Rehabilitation Act in its previous searches for vacant
positions to reassign him to and specifically requests that the Commission take
“administrative notice” that during 2020-2021 due to Covid, most of the Agency’s
administrative roles were performed remotely so Complainant could have been
                                         5                            2025000255

reassigned, even if temporarily, to one of those positions as a form of interim
accommodation. He also argues that he should be awarded front pay rather than
reinstatement as Complainant has since filed for retirement.3 Complainant also
challenges the Agency’s conclusion that the proposed removal was not retaliatory,
taking issue with the fact that it was issued after Complainant had filed appeals
regarding his award of compensatory damages and also that the Agency did not
explain why it later rescinded the proposed removal.

The Agency did not file a brief in response.

                            STANDARD OF REVIEW

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the
Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5,
2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant
submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s
own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

                                   ANALYSIS

Reasonable Accommodation

The Commission’s regulations require an agency to make reasonable
accommodation for the known physical and mental limitations of a qualified
individual with a disability unless it can show that accommodation would cause an
undue hardship. 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(o), 1630.2(p); EEOC Enforcement Guidance
on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, No. 915.002 (“EEOC Accommodation Guidance”), Question 1
(Oct. 17, 2002).

3
 Complainant does not challenge the Agency’s finding that it violated the
Rehabilitation Act when it did not offer Complainant the position of Transportation
Assistant even though he was qualified for the position.
                                         6                            2025000255


In general, reassignment is the reasonable accommodation of last resort and should
be considered only when (1) there are no effective accommodations that would
enable an employee to perform the essential functions of his or her current position
or (2) accommodating the employee in the current position would cause an undue
hardship. 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. § 1630.2(n); EEOC Accommodation Guidance.
An agency should reassign the employee to a vacant position that is equivalent in
terms of pay, status, and other related factors; if there are no vacant equivalent
positions, then the agency should reassign the employee to a lower-level position
that is closest to the current position. Id.

The Commission has also stated that an agency is in the best position to know
which jobs are vacant or will become vacant within a reasonable time and, as part
of the interactive process, should ask the employee about their qualifications and
interests. Because it possesses the relevant information, an agency is obligated to
inform an employee about vacant positions for which the employee may be eligible
as a reassignment. Woodman v. Runyon, 132 F.3d 1330, 1344 (10th Cir. 1997)
(federal employers are far better placed than employees to investigate in good faith
the availability of vacant positions); see also EEOC Accommodation Guidance at
Q. 28. The employee should assist the agency in identifying vacancies to the
extent that the employee has information about them. Further, if the agency is
unsure whether the employee is qualified for a particular position, the agency can
discuss with the employee his or her qualifications. Mengine v. Runyon, 114 F.3d
415, 419-20 (3d Cir. 1997) (once an employer has identified possible vacancies, an
employee has a duty to identify which one they are capable of performing) see also
EEOC Accommodation Guidance at Q. 28.

In this case, the Agency’s decision found that the Agency violated the
Rehabilitation Act when it did not offer Complainant the position of Transportation
Specialist for which he was found to be qualified and did not demonstrate that
providing Complainant with accommodation to perform that position would pose
an undue hardship on the Agency. On appeal, Complainant identified several other
positions for which he was arguably qualified and could have performed with an
accommodation. We do not find it necessary to discuss whether the Agency also
violated the Rehabilitation Act in not offering Complainant these specific positions
as it would not change the remedy to which Complainant is entitled. See
Complainant v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120120184 (Aug. 6,
2015) (noting that it was not necessary to address additional bases of
                                        7                            2025000255

discrimination because it would not change the remedy). However, we caution the
Agency that the HR Specialist’s actions with respect to the Transportation
Specialist position appear to be the result of a misunderstanding of the Agency’s
obligations under the Rehabilitation Act. The HR Specialist limited the search to
positions for which Complainant was qualified, and which were already classified
as being remote only. In other words, the HR Specialist appears to have limited
her search to vacant positions for which Complainant was qualified and could
perform only without accommodation. That, however, is not what is required of an
Agency under the Rehabilitation Act. In searching for a reassignment, the focus is
on finding a vacant, available position for which the employee is qualified and can
perform with or without an accommodation, unless providing the necessary
accommodation would cause an undue hardship for the Agency. See Corrina M. v.
Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 2022001028 (July 10, 2023).

Reprisal

In the absence of direct evidence, for a claim of reprisal discrimination, a
complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary framework established in
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). See Hochstadt v.
Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology, Inc., 425 F.Supp. 318, 321 (D.
Mass. 1976) (applying McDonnell Douglas scheme to discrimination in reprisal).
A complainant may establish a prima facie case of reprisal discrimination by
showing that: 1) the complainant engaged in protected activity; 2) the agency was
aware of the protected activity; 3) the complainant was subjected to adverse
treatment by the Agency; and 4) a nexus existed between the protected activity and
the adverse action. Whitmire v. Dep’t of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal No.
01A00340, (September 25, 2000).

In addition, because the Commission has a policy of considering reprisal claims
with a broad view of coverage, an employee can challenge actions that are not an
“ultimate employment action” or that do not materially affect the terms and
conditions of employment. See Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548
U.S. 53, 68 (2006); Carroll v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Request No. 05970939
(April 4, 2000). For claims of reprisal discrimination, a “materially adverse”
action is one that would deter a reasonable person from opposing discrimination or
participating in the EEO process. Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co., 548 U.S. at
68.
                                         8                             2025000255

Once a complainant establishes a prima facie case of reprisal discrimination, the
burden shifts, in accordance with McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. 792, to the
Agency to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the action. Tex.
Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). The complainant
then has the burden of proving by a preponderance of evidence that the reason
offered by the Agency is a pretext for a discriminatory motive. St. Mary’s Honor
Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 507 (1993). Pretext can be demonstrated by showing
such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions
in the Agency’s proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact
finder could rationally find them unworthy of credence. Opare-Addo v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120060802 (November 20, 2007), request for
reconsideration denied EEOC Request No. 0520080211 (May 30, 2008).

In this case, we find that Complainant has established a prima facie case of reprisal
with respect to the notice of proposed removal. There is no dispute that
Complainant engaged in protected activity that was active and ongoing at the time
the Agency issued the notice of proposed removal and the Service Chief
acknowledged that he was aware of Complainant’s protected activity when he
issued the notice of proposed removal. See ROI at 152. In addition, we find that a
notice of proposed removal would deter a reasonable employee from engaging in
protected activity. 4 Finally, while the notice of proposed removal was issued for
Complainant’s medical inability to perform the job, we note that the evidence in
the record is contradictory in this respect. 5 The Service Chief stated that he
decided to issue the notice of proposed removal for medical inability but also

4
  We note that it is not necessary for a complainant to demonstrate that he was
actually deterred from filing a complaint. See Complainant v. Internat’l Boundary
& Water Comm., EEOC Request No. 0520130669 (Feb. 11, 2014) (rejected
argument that an adverse action can only be retaliatory if it actually deterred
complainant or others from engaging in protected activity; test is whether the
action is reasonably likely to deter protected activity by complainant or other
employees).
5
  With respect to Complainant’s medical inability to perform the job, we note that
this was a direct consequence of the Agency’s discrimination. We further
emphasize that the failure to reassign Complainant appears to have been the result
of, at best, a misunderstanding of the Agency’s obligations under the
Rehabilitation Act or, at worst, a lack of good faith in conducting the search, as
discussed supra.
                                         9                            2025000255

stated that he supported the decision to rescind the proposed removal. See ROI at
157-58. He did not provide any reason to explain his support for rescinding the
proposed removal nor is there any evidence in the record of any change in the
circumstances that would justify rescinding the notice. We further note that the
Executive Director who decided to rescind the proposed removal was never
interviewed at any point during the investigation to explain why he decided to
rescind the proposed removal. The evidence in the record therefore does not
establish a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the Agency’s actions in first
proposing Complainant’s removal and then rescinding the proposal. See Chhe v.
Dep’t of Housing and Urban Dev., EEOC Request No. 0720090008 (Aug. 6, 2010)
(the consequence of an agency’s failure to meet its burden of production under
McDonnell Douglas is that the complainant, having established a prima facie case,
prevails without having to make any demonstration of pretext), request for recon.
den. EEOC Request No. 0520100584 (Jan. 27, 2011).

Under the circumstances of this case, we find that Complainant has established that
the Agency subjected him to reprisal when it issued him a notice of proposed
removal.     We therefore reverse the Agency’s final decision, finding no
discrimination with respect to the notice of proposed removal. We further find that
Complainant has established that he is entitled to compensatory damages in light of
the fact that the Agency’s retaliation amounts to a continuation of the Agency’s
previous discrimination against Complainant.

Remedies

When discrimination is found, an agency must provide the complainant with a
remedy that constitutes full, make-whole relief to restore him as nearly as possible
to the position he would have occupied absent the discrimination. See, e.g.,
Adesanya v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01933395 (July 21, 1994); see
also Franks v. Bowman Transp. Co., 424 U.S. 747, 764 (1976); Albemarle Paper
Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 418-19 (1975).

Here, the Agency’s final decision found that the Agency violated the
Rehabilitation Act when it did not offer Complainant the position of Transportation
Assistant. The Agency found Complainant entitled to the restoration of any leave
he took as a result of the failure to accommodate, made a promise to engage in the
interactive process to reassign Complainant to either the position of Transportation
                                         10                            2025000255

Assistant or an equivalent position that could be performed remotely, as well as
compensatory damages.

On appeal, Complainant argues that he should be entitled to front pay rather than
reinstatement. Front pay is an equitable remedy that compensates an individual
when reinstatement is not possible in certain limited circumstances. The
Commission has identified three circumstances where front pay may be awarded in
lieu of reinstatement: (1) where no position is available; (2) where a subsequent
working relationship between the parties would be antagonistic; or (3) where the
employer has a record of long-term resistance to anti-discrimination efforts. Tyler
v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Request No. 05870340 (Feb. I, 1988). In order for an
individual to be eligible for an award of front pay, the individual must be available
to work. See Finlay v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01942985 (Apr. 30,
1997); York v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01930435 (Feb. 25, 1994).

In this case, we do not find that front pay is appropriate because Complainant
himself acknowledged that he has since filed for retirement and therefore is not
available to work. We find, however, that Complainant is entitled to back pay in
order to make him whole for the pay he would have received had the Agency
complied with its obligations under the Rehabilitation Act to provide him with
reassignment. We note that in the previous cases involving Complainant in which
we found discrimination, we found that the restoration of leave is not an adequate
remedy under the circumstances and Complainant was entitled to compensation in
lieu of restoring the leave he took as a result of the discrimination. Finally, we
noted that Complainant’s entitlement to such compensation ended as of October
11, 2022. See Stanton S. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No.
2023003653 (March 26, 2024). In light of the relief we have previously awarded
Complainant, we find that Complainant is entitled to back pay beginning on
October 11, 2022, through the date on which Complainant’s retirement became
effective.

                                  CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal, including
those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM in part and REVERSE in part
the Agency’s final decision and REMAND the matter to the Agency for further
processing in accordance with the ORDER below.
                                        11                            2025000255

                                ORDER (D0617)

The Agency is ordered to take the following remedial actions:

      I.    Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
            Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with
            interest, and other benefits due Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
            1614.501. The back pay period will assume Complainant held the
            position of Transportation Assistant, GS-6, and shall begin on October
            11, 2022, through the date on which Complainant’s retirement became
            effective.
      II.   Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the
            Agency shall conduct and complete a supplemental investigation to
            determine the amount of compensatory damages to which
            Complainant is entitled for the Agency’s violation of the
            confidentiality provisions of the Rehabilitation Act and its act of
            retaliation against Complainant.6 In so doing, the Agency shall:

            a. Issue a notice to Complainant of his right to submit evidence based
               our guidance in Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No.
               01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993) and request evidence from Complainant
               in support of compensatory damages.7 The Notice shall provide
               Complainant with thirty (30) calendar days to respond (with an

6
  We note that the Agency already conducted an investigation and issued a FAD
with respect to Complainant’s compensatory damages for the failure to
accommodate.
7
  To establish entitlement to compensatory damages, the evidence must show a
causal relationship between the Agency’s discriminatory action and any pecuniary
(monetary) or non-pecuniary losses/harm experienced by Complainant. For more
information on evidence to determine compensatory damages: EEOC Management
Directive 110, Ch. 11 § VII (Aug. 5, 2015), available at
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/directives/md-110_chapter_11.cfm (provides the
types of compensatory damages available under EEOC statutes and “Objective
Evidence” of entitlement); and N. Thompson, Compensatory Damages in the
Federal Sector: An Overview, EEOC Digest Vol. XVI, No. 1 (Winter 2005)
available at https://www.eeoc.gov/federal/digest/xvi-1.cfm#article (explains Carle
v. Dep’t of the Navy under the subsection “Proof of Damages”).
                                   12                            2025000255

          option and instructions to request an extension in the case of
          extenuating circumstances). Complainant has a duty to cooperate
          with the Agency’s investigation to determine compensatory
          damages, including responding to agency requests for
          documentation or completing agency forms.
       b. Issue a new final agency decision (“Compensatory Damages
          FAD”) based on the findings of the supplemental investigation.
          The Compensatory Damages FAD shall state the amount (if any)
          of compensatory damages owed to Complainant and explain how
          the Agency determined that amount. The Compensatory Damages
          FAD shall include appeal rights to the Commission.
       c. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Compensatory
          Damages FAD is issued, the Agency shall pay Complainant the
          amount of compensatory damages it determined are owed. If there
          is a dispute over the exact amount of compensatory damages owed,
          the Agency shall pay the undisputed amount to Complainant. If
          Complainant disagrees with the agency’s award, they may
          challenge the Agency’s decision on the amount of compensatory
          damages by filing an appeal of the Compensatory Damages FAD
          with the Commission. Instructions on how to appeal, including the
          deadline to file, will be included in the appeal rights portion of the
          Compensatory Damages FAD.

III.   Within ninety (90) calendar days of the date this decision is issued,
       the Agency shall provide four hours of interactive EEO training to all
       human resources personnel at the Heinz Campus VA Medical Center
       who are in charge of dealing with requests for reasonable
       accommodation, including the HR Specialist, on the Rehabilitation
       Act and the Agency’s obligation to provide a reasonable
       accommodation, specifically with respect to reassignments. The
       training should also include the confidentiality requirements of the
       Rehabilitation Act. The Agency shall also provide two hours of
       interactive EEO training to all managers and supervisors who oversee
       Plumbers in the Agency’s Heinz Campus VA Medical Center,
       including the Service Chief and the Executive Director. The required
       training shall emphasize management’s responsibilities with regard to
       eliminating discrimination and reprisal in the workplace. For
                                        13                            2025000255

            assistance in obtaining the necessary training, the Agency may contact
            the Commission’s Outreach, Training and Engagement Division via
            email, at FederalTrainingandOutreach@eeoc.gov. The Agency shall
            provide the Compliance Officer with proof of attendance, as well as
            the contents and materials it used for the training. If the HR
            Specialist, the Service Chief, or the Executive Director have left the
            Agency’s employment, the Agency shall furnish documentation of
            their departure date.
      IV.   Within one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days of the date this
            decision is issued, the Agency shall consider taking disciplinary action
            against the HR Specialist, the Service Chief, and the Executive
            Director. The Commission does not consider training to be a
            disciplinary action. The Agency shall report its decision to the
            Commission and specify what, if any, action was taken. If the
            Agency decides not to take disciplinary action, then it shall set forth
            the reasons for its decision not to impose discipline.
      V.    The Agency shall pay Complainant reasonable attorney’s fees and
            costs as set forth in the paragraph below entitled “Attorney’s Fees.”
      VI.   The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the paragraph
            entitled, “Posting Order.”
The Agency shall determine the appropriate amount of back pay, with interest, and
other benefits due the Complainant, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501, no later than
sixty (60) calendar days after the date this decision was issued. The Complainant
shall cooperate in the Agency's efforts to compute the amount of backpay and
benefits due and shall provide all relevant information requested by the Agency. If
there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of back pay and/or benefits, the
Agency shall issue a check to the Complainant for the undisputed amount within
sixty (60) calendar days of the date the Agency determines the amount it believes
to be due. The Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of the
amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed with
the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement entitled
“Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”
The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance in digital format as
provided in the statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s
                                        14                            2025000255

Decision.” The report shall be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal
(FedSEP).     See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Further, the report must include
supporting documentation of the Agency's calculation of backpay and other
benefits due Complainant, including evidence that the corrective action has been
implemented.
                           POSTING ORDER (G0617)

The Agency is ordered to post at its Heinz VA Medical Center in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being signed
by the Agency’s duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard copy
and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this
decision was issued, and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days, in
conspicuous places, including all places where notices to employees are
customarily posted. The Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said
notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material. The original
signed notice is to be submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the
paragraph entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision,’ within 10
calendar days of the expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital
format and must be submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).



     IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)
Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s
corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion
of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector
EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital format required by the
Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under which compliance
was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit
via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the
Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must
contain supporting documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency
must send a copy of all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.
If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may
petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with
                                         15                            2025000255

the Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for
enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying
complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42
U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil
action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition
for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the
orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the
referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.

                          ATTORNEY’S FEES (H1019)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R. §
1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), he is entitled to an award of reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred in the processing of the complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award of
attorney’s fees shall be paid by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified
statement of fees to the Agency -- not to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Office of Federal Sector -- within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt
of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney's fees in
accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.
                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
                                         16                            2025000255

requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (T0124)
This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action in part, but it also requires
the Agency to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your
complaint. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision on both that portion of your complaint which the Commission has
                                          17                             2025000255

affirmed and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for continued
administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint
with the Agency, or your appeal with the Commission, until such time as the
Agency issues its final decision on your complaint. If you file a civil action, you
must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency
head or department head, identifying that person by their full name and official
title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility
or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a
civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of
your complaint.
                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         18                            2025000255

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:




_________________________ Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


May 6, 2026
Date
