           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Jasper R., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                          Lori Chavez-DeRemer,
                                 Secretary,
                           Department of Labor
               (Occupational Safety & Health Administration),
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024004534

                         Agency No. DOL-23-01-092

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s July 3, 2024, final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Compliance Safety and Health Officer, GS-11, at the
Agency’s Bangor District Office in Bangor, Maine.

On June 28, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination
by the Agency on the bases of disability (back impairment) and in reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity when: 1) in February 2023, Complainant was
reprimanded for claiming government purchased tickets on a travel claim; and

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024004534

2) in April 2023, Complainant was terminated from federal service during his
probationary period.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), which concluded that Complainant did not prove that
the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed
the instant appeal but offers no arguments in support of his appeal.

Having reviewed the record, we find that even if Complainant established a
prima facie case of discrimination on the alleged bases, the Agency articulated
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, namely that Complainant
was reprimanded for submitting travel vouchers that exceeded his actual costs
and for claiming unnecessary travel expenses. According to the Agency,
Complainant was ultimately removed from federal service due to his “pattern
of failure” to submit accurate travel vouchers in accordance with the Agency’s
travel policies, on which Complainant had received training.

Complainant ultimately failed to establish that the proffered reasons were not
worthy of belief, because he offered no evidence to support his assertions of
animus beyond his disagreement with the Agency’s reasons. Complainant
failed to identify any similarly situated employees outside of his protected
classes who were treated differently or more favorably. And we note that when
Complainant was asked to explain why he believed his disability and prior EEO
activity were factors in the Agency’s actions, he offered no response.

It is well-established that mere disagreement with the Agency’s actions is not
sufficient to establish discrimination. See Eryn M. v. Dep’t of the Army, EEOC
Appeal No. 2022000871 (April 10, 2023). Moreover, the Commission has
repeatedly stated that mere assertions or conjecture that an agency's
explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination are insufficient because
subjective belief, however genuine, does not constitute evidence of any
unlawful motive. See Leif S. v. Dep’t of the Treas., EEOC Appeal No.
2021004037 (April 28, 2022); Juliet B. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019). Accordingly, Complainant has not met his burden
to establish that the Agency’s reasons were pretext for discrimination.
Therefore, based on our review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.
                                       3                           2024004534

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.
                                        4                           2024004534

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                    Carlton M. Hadden’s sign
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations

September 3, 2025
Date
