           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                  Harry E.,1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                          United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2026000928

                         Agency No. 4G-290-10145-25

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 24, 2025 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision
finding no discrimination.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was a Supervisor
Customer Services, EAS-17, at the Agency’s Williamston Post Office in
Williamston, South Carolina.



1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                             2026000928

On September 16, 2025, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against him based on race (African American), sex (male),
and color (black) when, on May 3, 2025, he was notified that he was not selected
for the position of Postmaster, Williamston Post Office.

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final Agency decision. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

The Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s
nonselection. The position at issue (Postmaster, EAS-20) was open to internal
applicants. In their applications, applicants addressed the following KSAs
(knowledge, skills, and abilities): decision making and problem solving; budget
operations; planning and scheduling of work; safety and health; customer and
community relations; labor relations; EEO; employee development; and
supervision. A Review Committee consisting of three employees scored each of
the applicants’ KSA narratives from 0-3, and those with the highest scores were
referred to the selecting official (SO), Post Office Operations Manager, for an
interview. Complainant received a score of 19, while the Selectee received a score
of 23, which was the highest of all the applicants.

Five applicants, including Complainant, interviewed for the position and were
asked the same questions. SO averred that the Selectee’s interview responses were
more detailed than Complainant’s, as reflected in SO’s interview notes. SO further
stated that Complainant, who had been acting as an Officer-in-Charge (a temporary
Postmaster position) at the Williamston Post Office, had not demonstrated
sufficient knowledge of operations in that role. In addition, at the time of his
selection, the Selectee had worked as a Postmaster (in a different state/facility)
since 2022, and also previously served in details at the EAS-21 and EAS-22 levels.
We find that Complainant failed to prove by a preponderance of evidence that the
Agency’s explanations were pretext for discrimination based on his protected
bases. We find the record does not reflect that Complainant was plainly superior to
the Selectee.
                                         3                             2026000928

Upon our review of the record and the parties’ arguments on appeal, we AFFIRM
the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition.     See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.
                                           4                              2026000928

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2026000928

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



_________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


June 24, 2026
Date
