           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Mary B., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                  David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                          United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                     Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024004197

                         Agency No. 4E-913-0129-23

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s June 3, 2024, final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §
621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Part-Time Regular Laborer, Custodial at the Turlock Post
Office in Turlock, California.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024004197

On December 26, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency on the bases of color (brown), age (over 40),
and disability (physical) when, on July 13, 2023, she was issued a Notice of
Removal (Notice) effective 30 days from receipt of the Notice for Failure to
Follow Instructions/Absent Without Approved Leave (AWOL). 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), which concluded that Complainant did not prove that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination as the record showed that the
Agency’s removal action was based on her extended absence since November
2021, and failure to provide medical documentation.

On appeal, Complainant argues that she submitted medical documentation
every eight weeks during the relevant period and attended an investigative
interview explaining her absences. However, management officials responded
that the individual whom Complainant reported sending her medical
documentation did not receive it because he had retired. Management added
that Complainant did not explain when she would return from leave other
saying that she would return “soon” after her yet to be scheduled shoulder
surgery. As a result, Complainant was charged with being AWOL and the
Agency ultimately removed her from federal service. 3 As Complainant failed
to demonstrate that management acted with discriminatory animus, we find
that Complainant cannot prevail on her claim of discriminatory removal.




2
  On January 17, 2024, the Agency dismissed an additional allegation for
failure to state a claim due to lodging a collateral attack on the proceedings
of another forum. Complainant does not challenge the dismissal of this claim
on appeal. The Commission exercises its discretion to address only those
issues specifically raised on appeal and declines to address this procedural
dismissal. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110) at Chap. 9, § IV.A (Aug. 5, 2015).
3
  After Complainant filed a grievance challenging her removal, the Agency
agreed to rescind the removal action to resolve the grievance.
                                       3                           2024004197

To the extent Complainant alleges that she was denied a reasonable
accommodation, we also find that she cannot prevail on this claim because
our review of Complainant’s disability compensation records (CA-17s) show
that Complainant was completely unable to work in the months leading up to
her removal. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request
for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from
receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit
a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
                                        4                           2024004197

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests.
                                       5                           2024004197

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s sign
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 15, 2025
Date
