           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Palmer N, 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                              Daniel Driscoll,
                                Secretary,
                          Department of the Army,
                                 Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2023005334

                      Agency No. ARWSMR22OCT00153

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s August 24, 2023, final decision concerning his equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as an Electrical Engineer, GS-0850-12 at the
Agency’s Engineering Services Division in White Sands Missile Range, New
Mexico.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                          2023005334

On January 18, 2022, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that
the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work
environment based on his race (African American), color (black), age (YOB
1945), disability (physical) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
(requesting reasonable accommodations) when management marked him
absent without leave (AWOL), continuously requested that he provide
documentation from his physicians regarding his medical condition, denied
his reasonable accommodation request, required him to return in his
computer, denied his leave requests (annual leave, and Family Medical
Leave Act/FMLA leave) and request for reassignment/transfer, and ignored
his complaints of retaliation which resulted in his supervisor being appointed
as Interim Division Chief with more authority.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. Complainant requested a final agency decision.

In the decision, the agency determined that there was no violation of the
Rehabilitation Act concerning Complainant’s request for reasonable
accommodation. The agency explained that the record included several
medical notes from Complainant’s physician regarding Complainant’s
condition. A June 15, 2020, note from Complainant’s cardiologist stated that
Complainant had undergone “some testing and procedures” and
recommended that Complainant “work remotely from home, if possible, for
the next 90 days or until his next [follow-up appointment]” which was
scheduled for September 2020.           An August 6, 2020, note from
Complainant’s cardiologist stated that Complainant could return to work on
October 30, 2020.       However, before October 30, 2020, Complainant
requested to continue teleworking which Complainant’s supervisor (S1)
declined because medical documentation indicated that Complainant could
return to work. S1 concluded that the need for accommodation ended as
well as Complainant’s fulltime telework based on the August 2020 medical
documentation.

Subsequently, S1 provided Complainant a new telework agreement which
permitted Complainant to telework two days per week (Tuesdays and
Thursdays). However, on November 3, 2020, Complainant submitted a note
from his primary care physician stating that he should be allowed to “work
from home due to his increased risk of contracting COVID-19 based on his
medical history.” Complainant then submitted a signed telework agreement
but modified the agreement to state that he would telework fulltime.
                                               3                                2023005334

S1 canceled that agreement because not all of Complainant’s job duties
could be performed remotely. 2

Nevertheless, Complainant provided a November 13, 2020, medical note
stating that Complainant had unstable blood pressure following an episode of
cardiac arrest. The physician recommended that due to Complainant’s
current health instability, that his return to work should be temporarily
delayed until his health condition improved and stabilized. As a result,
Complainant was permitted to telework fulltime. Thereafter, Complainant
submitted a January 5, 2021, medical note from his cardiologist
recommending that he continue to telework through January 2022.
However, Complainant submitted another medical note, dated July 23, 2021,
where his physician stated, in pertinent part, that:

       According to [Complainant], the workplace stress has been very
       intense and detrimental to his cardiac condition. . . . Therefore, he has
       indicated he can complete his duties adequately from home and be in
       an environment that may not provoke his abnormal rhythm. If so, I
       would recommend he continue to work from home. I recommend that
       he be allowed to continue to his work from home environment if he
       can perform the duties adequately from that location. (emphasis
       added).

S1 determined that Complainant could not perform all the essential duties of
his position from home, and therefore, S1 terminated Complainant’s fulltime
telework agreement effective on August 28, 2021. Thereafter, S1 provided
Complainant a new telework agreement for 50 percent telework
(Complainant would telework on Tuesdays and Thursdays).             However,
Complainant did not sign the new telework agreement, failed to return to the
office on the designated office days, and continued teleworking from home.

Because Complainant continued teleworking without a telework agreement,
he had unauthorized absences from work which resulted in S1 having
Complainant marked absent without leave (AWOL).              Specifically,
Complainant was marked AWOL only for the days he was required to report
to the office.




2
 Specifically, Complainant was required to conduct site visit one to three times per week and he
could not perform these duties remotely.
                                                  4                                  2023005334

S1 indicated that Complainant was not marked AWOL for what would have
been his telework days even though there was no official telework
agreement in place. S1 further informed Complainant in an August 30, 2021
email, that “without a telework plan, the property pass of the computer
equipment in your possession is not valid. All computer equipment must be
returned to WSMR by tomorrow unless an approved telework plan is in
place.”

Thereafter, on November 9, 2021, the Agency denied Complainant’s request
for fulltime telework because (1) the medical documentation was
inadequate, (2) the accommodation would require removal of one or more
essential job functions, and (3) failure to engage in the interactive
process/the requested accommodation is not effective. The denial
determination indicated that Complainant failed to respond to requests for
additional medical documentation to determine whether he was cleared to
return to the office in response to what the physician indicated in the July
2021 medical note. The denial determination further noted that during the
period that Complainant had been approved to telework fulltime as an
accommodation, the accommodation was ineffective. 3 Lastly, the denial
determination explained that while Complainant had been previously
approved for fulltime telework, “the upcoming FY 22 workload and the
requirement that some on-site work is required, the fulltime telework
agreement was canceled effective August 28, 2021.”

As a last resort, the Agency considered Complainant’s December 21, 2021,
request for reassignment to a Mechanical Engineering position. However,
the Agency determined that Complainant was not qualified for this position
and there were no other positions available to assign Complainant.

The Agency further found that Complainant’s requests for Family Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) and sick leave requests were denied because Complainant
failed to provide adequate medical documentation despite S1’s requests that
he submit the required information.




3
  The record indicates that during the period that Complainant teleworked fulltime, Complainant failed
to complete his duties even when three Project Managers returned to work fulltime to complete some
of Complainant’s onsite duties. The record further indicates that Complainant took issue with the work
the Project Managers completed which resulted in the Project Managers refusing to volunteer to assist
Complainant.
                                     5                         2023005334

Contrary to Complainant’s allegation, the Agency determined that the record
failed to support that the Director of Directorate of Public Works,
Complainant’s third level supervisor (S3), ignored Complainant’s complaints
of retaliation and appointed S1 as interim Division Chief, a position with
more authority. The Agency found that testimony in the record supported
that S3 asked three managers, including S1, regarding their interest in the
position after the employee who held the position retired from the agency.
The Agency indicated that S1 expressed interest in the position.

Regarding Complainant’s overall claim that these instances constituted
discriminatory harassment, the Agency explained that the none of these
actions (denial of Complainant’s full-time telework request/reasonable
accommodation, reassignment request, leave and FMLA leave requests; and
S1’s promotion to Interim Division Chief) were based on Complainant’s
protected basis. Therefore, the Agency determined that Complainant had
not demonstrated that he was subjected to discriminatory harassment as
alleged.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).        See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at 9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, and construing any inferences raised
by the undisputed facts in favor of Complainant, we find that a reasonable
fact-finder could not find in Complainant’s favor. The record shows that the
Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons regarding denial of
reassignment request, leave and FMLA leave requests. The record supports
that Complainant was not qualified for the Mechanical Engineering position
and there were no other vacant positions available for which Complainant
was eligible, and Complainant failed to provide sufficient medical
documentation to support his leave and FMLA leave requests. The record
further supports that Agency requested that Complainant turn in his
computer when he continued teleworking from home during the period that
he did not have an authorized telework agreement in place.
                                     6                         2023005334

Additionally, the Agency indicated that S1’s temporary promotion was in
response to a position vacancy and not in response to Complainant’s prior
protected EEO activity.

We further find that the Agency engaged in the interactive process regarding
Complainant’s reasonable accommodation to telework full-time. Here, the
record supports that Complainant failed to provide additional medical
documentation to support that he could perform the essential functions of
his position from home. The record indicates that S1 notified Complainant in
a May 26, 2021, email, that a reassessment of Complainant’s reasonable
accommodation request was due on or about July 1, 2021. Specifically, S1
explained that Complainant’s physician’s evaluation should address the
physical demands and work conditions provided in Complainant’s position
description. S1 outlined those demands and conditions and noted that the
“work is usually performed in an office setting.” However, the July 2021
medical note did not specifically address the demands and work conditions
and only indicated that Complainant could telework if he could perform his
work duties from home. The record supports Complainant’s prior work
agreements involving fulltime telework were not effective. The record
further supports that an increase in the FY 2022 workload necessitated more
on-site work. When Complainant failed to provide the requested medical
documentation, Complainant effectively stopped engaging in the interactive
active process. Therefore, the Agency’s decision to deny Complainant’s
reasonable accommodation request was proper.

Regarding Complainant’s harassment allegations, we agree with the Agency
that here, the preponderance of the evidence does not establish that
management was motivated by discriminatory or retaliatory animus.
Complainant’s claim of harassment is precluded based on our findings that
Complainant failed to establish that any of the actions taken by the Agency
were motivated by his protected bases. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Service,
EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision finding no discrimination.
                                      7                           2023005334

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                       8                           2023005334

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations

July 30, 2025
Date
