           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Earlie P., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                                 David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                         United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024003923

                          Agency No. 4G330010424

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s June 11, 2024, final decision concerning her equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Title II of the Genetic
Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C. § 2000ff et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Sales/Service Distribution Associate at the
Agency’s Jog Road Post Office in Boynton Beach, Florida. On January 4,
2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination by the
Agency on the bases of race (Dominican/White), sex (female), color (brown
with white spots on skin), and genetic information (Vitiligo) when on dates



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                           2024003923

to be specified around December 2023, Complainant was charged with Leave
Without Pay (LWOP) instead of the requested sick leave.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing   before     an    Equal    Employment     Opportunity  Commission
Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency.            When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29
C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant did not
prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.
Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

We find the Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
charging Complainant with LWOP. Specifically, Supervisor stated that the
documentation Complainant submitted was insufficient under Agency policy
to support Complainant’s request for sick leave. After a review of the
record, we find Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s articulated
reason for the action was a mere pretext for discrimination. Complainant
failed to present any evidence on which to question the Agency’s asserted
reason other than her own beliefs and assertions.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
                                      3                           2024003923

See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                       4                           2024003923

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 26, 2025
Date
