           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                    Dixie B., 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                 David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                           United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025002718

                           Agency No. 4G-290-0130-24

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 29, 2025 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.
For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Sales and Service/Distribution Associate at the Agency’s Post
Office in North Augusta, Georgia.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025002718

On September 21, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the bases
of disability (physical) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

      1. From October 11, 2023 to December 12, 2023, her time was entered
         incorrectly;
      2. From December 12, 2023, she was forced to work 12 to 14-hour days;
      3. From December 12, 2023, management refused to honor her Family and
         Medical Leave Act (FMLA) restrictions; and
      4. On April 25, 2024, her Non-Traditional Full-Time (NTFT) position was
         abolished and re-posted as a full-time position.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant did not
prove that she was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. Complainant
then filed the instant appeal.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, we find that the evidence in the record does
not establish that the alleged incidents were sufficiently severe or pervasive to
constitute a hostile work environment. Furthermore, aside from Complainant's bare
uncorroborated assertions, the record does not support a finding that any of the
alleged actions were based on Complainant's protected classes. Rather, the record
reflects that the alleged incidents were more likely the result of routine supervision
and general workplace disputes. The Agency articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, including staffing shortages requiring
extended work hours for all clerks, the expiration of Complainant’s FMLA
certification without updated medical documentation, and the operational need to
abolish the NTFT position and create a full-time regular assignment. The evidence
demonstrates that all clerks were required to work extended hours due to severe
staffing shortages. Additionally, management provided credible operational reasons
for requiring overtime, requesting updated medical documentation to support FMLA
certification, and the need to restructure the clerk position. Complainant has not
presented evidence demonstrating that the Agency’s explanations were pretext for
discrimination or reprisal.
                                           3                               2025002718

Additionally, to the extent that Complainant claims that the alleged incidents led to
her resignation, a finding of a constructive discharge is precluded by our finding that
Complainant cannot establish that she was subjected to discrimination and a hostile
work environment as alleged.

                                   CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we conclude that the evidence does not establish that Complainant was
subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile work environment as alleged.
Therefore, the Agency’s final decision is AFFIRMED.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                           4                              2025002718

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director,
Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular
mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail
addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible
postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                           5                              2025002718

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 8, 2026
Date
