           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                    Hettie T.,1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                 Brooke Rollins,
                                   Secretary,
                            Department of Agriculture,
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2024004453

                           Agency No. FS-2023-00492

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 28, 2024, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission VACATES the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Air
Attack Pilot for Gold Aero, Inc., a contractor to the Agency, in Fort Morgan,
Colorado.

On September 18, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against her on the bases of sex (female) and in reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity when:
1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2024004453

      1.     On February 5, 2023, the Chief Pilot terminated her from her contract
             position as an Air Attack Pilot.
      2.     On or around September 21, 2022, management intentionally prevented
             the aircraft from flying for several months and removed her from duty
             for 12 days.
Complainant also alleged that she was subjected to a hostile work environment based
on her sex, including but not limited to, being called a problem employee, criticism
of her flying abilities, interference with flight operations, unwarranted delays of
flight assignments, questioning of her competence, aggressive confrontations, and
efforts to remove her from flight duty. Complainant also alleged that she was
referred to as a “fucking bitch” and a “fucking cunt”. Complainant also asserted that
Agency officials intimidated Gold Aero Inc., into terminating her.

The Agency dismissed the complaint after determining that she was not an employee
of the Agency. Complainant appealed that decision. On March 14, 2024, the
Commission determined that the record was insufficient to determine whether
Complainant, a contract pilot for Gold Aero, was a joint employee of the Agency.
The Commission concluded that the Agency’s joint-employment analysis was
incomplete, failed to adequately investigate the parties’ actual working relationship,
and overlooked evidence suggesting significant Agency control over Complainant's
work. The Commission vacated the dismissal and remanded the case for a
supplemental investigation and further processing of the complaint. Hettie T. v.
Dep’t of Agric., EEOC Appeal No. 2024001081 (Mar. 14, 2024).

On March 26, 2024, the Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. As the
Agency determined that Complainant’s complaint was a mixed case complaint – a
discrimination complaint stemming from an action appealable to the Merit Systems
Protection Board (MSPB) – the Agency informed Complainant that she was not
entitled to a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). The Agency noted
that following its investigation, a final decision would be issued, and that upon
receipt, Complainant could appeal it to the MSPB.

On June 28, 2024, the Agency issued its final decision on the merits of the complaint.
While the Agency initially informed Complainant that she could appeal the
Agency’s final decision to the MSPB, in its final decision, the Agency backtracked
and informed Complainant, in a footnote, that it had erred in accepting the case as a
mixed case complaint.
                                          3                              2024004453

The Agency emphasized that since Complainant was a contractor, mixed case rights
did not apply, and Complainant’s sole appeal option was to appeal the Agency’s
final decision to the EEOC. The Agency went on to conclude that while Complainant
had established that the Agency was her joint employer, she nevertheless failed to
prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.

                          CONTENTIONS ON APPEAL

On appeal, Complainant argues that the Agency’s final decision should be reversed
because the investigation was incomplete, relied on inaccurate evidence, failed to
interview key witnesses, improperly used testimony from a separate misconduct
investigation, and that she denied the opportunity to elect a hearing. Specifically,
Complainant asserts that “[a]t no point was I presented with an opportunity to elect
either a hearing before an EEOC AJ or a [final decision] as I was told my case was
with the MSPB. The Agency never informed me it was reverted back to the EEOC.”

The Agency opposes the appeal arguing that Complainant was not subjected to
discrimination; however, the Agency does not address Complainant’s concerns
regarding the Agency’s failure to afford her the opportunity to elect a hearing.

                                    ANALYSIS

The record indicates that following a remand from the Commission, the Agency
issued Complainant a mixed-case acceptance letter on March 16, 2024. In that letter,
the Agency affirmatively advised Complainant that the complaint was a mixed case
and that MSPB procedures applied. The Agency later acknowledged in its final
decision that this advice was incorrect. We find no evidence that Complainant was
afforded an opportunity to elect a hearing after the Agency determined that mixed-
case procedures did not apply and before the Agency issued its final decision.
Because the Agency initially advised Complainant that MSPB rights governed and
later determined that EEOC procedures controlled, the Agency bore the
responsibility of ensuring that Complainant was provided with clear notice of her
right to request a hearing before an EEOC AJ. The present record does not establish
that this occurred. Based on Complainant’s arguments on appeal, it is clear that
Complainant believes that the record is insufficient and the opportunity for a hearing
is warranted. Accordingly, we VACATE the final decision and REMAND the
complaint for a hearing.
                                          4                              2024004453

                                       ORDER

Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
shall submit a request for a hearing to the EEOC’s Detroit Field Office, along with
a copy of the complete complaint file and a copy of this decision. The Agency shall
provide written notification to the Compliance Officer as indicated below that the
hearing request and complaint file has been transmitted to the Hearings Unit.
Thereafter, the Administrative Judge will issue a decision on the complaint in
accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109, and the Agency shall issue a final action in
accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110.



      IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s
corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of
each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO
Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital format required by the
Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under which compliance
was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via
FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting
documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of
all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may
petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with
the Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for
enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying
complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C.
2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.
                                           5                               2024004453

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders
set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this
matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for
enforcement by that agency.



                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)



The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:


      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
                                          6                              2024004453

Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of
your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file
such action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90)
calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. In the alternative, you
may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the
date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. Filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing of your
complaint.
                                           7                              2024004453



                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).



FOR THE COMMISSION:




                            Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


August 27, 2026
Date
