           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                   Tanya D., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                  Secretary,
                         Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                   Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025000003

                      Agency No. 200H-10N1-2023-151188

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
September 4, 2024, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Equal
Pay Act of 1963, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d) et seq. For the following reasons,
the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Healthcare Engineer (Energy Manager), GS-12, at the Agency’s VA Medical Center
in Providence, Rhode Island. Complainant’s facility was part of the Veterans
Integrated Service Network (VISN)1 region.



1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                                2025000003


On May 8, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her based on sex (female) when she learned that a male
coworker (CW1) was assigned to the GS-13 grade level, while she remained in a
GS-12 position, and management denied her request for promotion to the GS-13
grade level.2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge or a final decision from the Agency. In
accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant
to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). While the Agency found that Complainant established
a prima facie case of discrimination under the EPA, the Agency found that
Complainant’s EPA claim failed because the Agency articulated a sex-neutral factor
based on seniority for CW1’s higher pay grade, namely that, unlike CW1,
Complainant was hired after the VISN1 Rating Board reclassified the Healthcare
Engineer position and downgraded its promotion potential from a GS-13 to a GS-
12. Regarding the claim that the Agency failed to promote Complainant to a GS-13
grade level, while the Agency acknowledged that other VISN regions had Healthcare
Engineers with promotion potential up to GS-13, the Agency explained that
Complainant did not qualify for the GS-13 paygrade because her position did not
require her to perform at least 25 percent of her duties at the VISN or national level.
The Agency ultimately concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

As an initial matter, we find Complainant’s challenges to the integrity of the
investigative process unpersuasive. Here, Complainant argues that the supplemental
investigation is missing from the file, that two key witnesses were not interviewed,
and that one witness failed to respond to a request for an affidavit.

2
  Complainant originally raised a claim of failure to engage in alternative dispute
resolution, which was dismissed for failure to state a claim, and additional claims of
denied promotions, which were dismissed for untimely contact with an EEO
counselor. Complainant does not challenge these dismissals on appeal. We exercise
our discretion to review only those issues specifically raised in an appeal and will
not address those claims in this decision. See EEOC Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614, (MD-110), Chap. 9, § IV.A. (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                       3                                2025000003


However, we note that Complainant elected to request a final decision from the
Agency without a hearing and chose to forgo her opportunity to develop the record
through discovery or examination of witnesses. See Irene W. v. Dep’t of Vet. Affs.,
EEOC Appeal No. 2021003834 (Mar. 9, 2023). Furthermore, the supplemental
investigation that Complainant argues is missing is, in fact, included in the appeal
record. Thus, we find the investigative record is adequately developed and provides
sufficient facts on which to issue a decision by summary judgment.

The U.S. Supreme Court articulated the requirements for establishing a prima facie
case of discrimination under the EPA in Corning Glass Works v. Brennan, 417 U.S.
188 (1974). To establish a prima facie case of a violation under the EPA, a
complainant must show that she or he received less pay than an individual of the
opposite sex for equal work, requiring equal skill, effort, and responsibility, under
similar working conditions within the same establishment. Sheppard v. Equal Emp’t
Opportunity Comm’n, EEOC Appeal No. 01A02919 (Sept. 12, 2000), req. for
recons. den., EEOC Request No. 05A10076 (Aug. 12, 2003).

Once a complainant has met the burden of establishing a prima facie case, an
employer may avoid liability only by showing that the difference in pay is justified
under one of the four affirmative defenses set forth in the EPA: (1) a seniority
system; (2) a merit system; (3) a system which measures earnings by quantity or
quality of production of work (also referred to as an incentive or piecework system);
or (4) a differential based on any factor other than sex. EEOC Compliance Manual,
Number 915.003, Section 10(IV): Compensation Discrimination (Dec. 5, 2000).

Here, it is undisputed that Complainant established a prima facie case of
discrimination under the EPA. As such, we only need to address the Agency’s
affirmative defenses. Upon review, we find that the alleged difference in pay was
justified by a factor other than sex. Specifically, the record reveals that in 2006,
VISN1 reclassified Complainant’s position and downgraded its promotion potential
from a GS-13 to a GS-12. As Complainant was hired in 2013, her full promotion
level was GS-12. CW1, in contrast, was “grandfathered in” and kept his GS-13 grade
level because he was hired prior to the reclassification.

Complainant argues that there is no merit to the Agency’s affirmative defense, as the
Agency has been advertising vacant Healthcare Engineer positions across the nation
at the GS-13 level since 2022.
                                         4                                 2025000003


However, we do not find these positions to be similarly situated to Complainant’s
position. As noted in the Agency’s response to Complainant’s appeal, Complainant’s
position did not qualify for the GS-13 Healthcare Engineer position because the GS-
13 grade level required incumbents to perform at least 25 percent of their duties at
the VISN or national level. Complainant’s duties, however, were exclusively at the
local level. While Complainant disputes the Agency’s explanation and emphasizes
that she and her colleagues were required to support multiple VA facilities, she does
not, however, dispute the Agency’s assertion that male Healthcare Engineers at her
facility who were hired after the reclassification had the same GS-12 promotion
potential as her. Indeed, by Complainant’s own admission, “the VISN1 Rating Board
downgraded ALL newly hired Energy Engineers. [emphasis original]” ROI at 616.
As such, we conclude that Complainant cannot prevail on her EPA claim.

Complainant also claims that she was subjected to disparate treatment based on sex
when she was deemed not eligible for promotion to the GS-13 grade level. While we
certainly understand Complainant’s frustration regarding her inability to be
promoted to the GS-13 grade level like Healthcare Engineers at other VISNs, we
find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for denying
Complainant’s request as discussed above. Even considering Complainant’s
arguments in support of her appeal, we nevertheless remain unpersuaded.
Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
                                        5                                 2025000003


reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be submitted
together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will consider
requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court.
                                        6                                 2025000003


“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also
file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative processing
of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                            Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


June 11, 2026
Date
