                                        2                            2026001263

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Cook
Supervisor, WG-05, at the Agency’s Clinical Center, Nutrition Department,
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. On September 26, 2023,
Complainant filed a complaint alleging discrimination based on race (African
American), color (black), and in reprisal for prior EEO activity when:

   1. On June 6, 2023, management informed Complainant he must perform extra
      duties outside of his position description.

   2. On July 15, 2023, management denied Complainant leave unless he found
      coverage for his requested time off.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of Complainant’s right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge or a final Agency decision. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

Regarding claim 1, Complainant acknowledged that, due to a staff shortage
resulting from the loss of two secretaries and an executive chef, he and the other
three Cook Supervisors (a female Filipino employee, a male African American
employee, and a female African American employee) were assigned additional
duties. Despite Complainant’s assertions, the Chief of the Nutrition Department
(“Chief”) stated that Cook Supervisors, including Complainant, were performing
their duties that remained within the scope of their position descriptions.

Regarding claim 2, Complainant asserted that his leave request was initially
approved, but he was later informed that another supervisor had also requested the
same weekend off. Complainant stated that he was asked to coordinate leave
coverage. The Chief explained that there were only four Cook Supervisors in the
department, including Complainant, and that it was the department’s established
practice for supervisors to coordinate their leave to ensure adequate coverage.
Complainant acknowledged that the Chief subsequently approved his leave at issue
after he brought the matter to her attention.
                                         3                             2026001263

Upon review, we find that Complainant failed to provide any evidence to show that
the Agency’s articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the alleged
incidents were pretextual. Further, we find no evidence showing that similarly
situated persons were treated differently regarding the alleged incidents. After a
review of the record, we find no evidence showing that the alleged incidents were
motivated by discrimination or retaliation as alleged.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507.
                                           4                              2026001263

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be
deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of
the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2026001263

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


June 3, 2026
Date
