           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                   Lisa B., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                  David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                          United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                     Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024003652

                         Agency No. 4G-752-0140-23

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s April 26, 2024 final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §
621 et seq., and Title II of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of
2008, 42 U.S.C. § 2000ff et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Mail Processing Clerk at the Agency’s Valley Ranch Station
in Irving, Texas.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024003652

On May 9, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the bases
of race (African American), national origin (unspecified), sex (female), religion
(Baptist), disability (mental and physical), age (45), genetic information
(unspecified), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity, as evidenced by
numerous incidents including being denied overtime; being assigned to
different work hours and duties; being placed in Emergency Placement in an
off-duty status and suspended; and being subjected to harassment by her co-
workers and supervisors.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant
was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The instant appeal
followed.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, we find that the alleged incidents,
were more likely the result of routine supervision, personality conflicts, and
general workplace disputes and are therefore insufficiently severe or pervasive
to establish a discriminatory hostile work environment. Furthermore, we find
that the conduct was not sufficiently material to deter protected activity. In
addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the
alleged conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. For
example, the record demonstrates that Complainant was generally rude and
abrasive toward her co-workers, which required management to take
corrective action. Complainant was placed on emergency placement after
several altercations with co-workers and supervisors. Complainant was
subsequently disciplined for her aggressive and threatening behavior.
Complainant was not denied overtime opportunities; rather, there was no
need for overtime for Complainant’s duties at the time. Complainant was an
unassigned regular and her hours and position changed when she was
automatically awarded a position when it became available. Complainant has
not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the Agency's explanation for
its actions was pretext for discrimination or reprisal.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.
                                       3                           2024003652

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.
                                        4                           2024003652

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                    Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations

August 6, 2025
Date
