                                       2                          2023001104

   1. From January 26, 2020, through April 6, 2020, management failed to
      respond to Complainant’s request for a reasonable accommodation;
   2. On October 21, 2019, Complainant was notified that she was not
      selected for a Psychology Technician position; and
   3. On March 30, 2020, Complainant became aware that her supervisor had
      marked her as Absent Without Leave (AWOL) even though Complainant
      had submitted documentation for leave under the Family and Medical
      Leave Act (FMLA).

Complainant stated that she suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and anxiety as well as memory deficits after she suffered an attack by
an inmate. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 62. Complainant asserted
that after she submitted a request for FMLA leave, it was essentially ignored,
and she was marked AWOL. See ROI at 63. She stated that she wanted more
time to perform her duties and a reassignment to another position that does
not require contact with inmates. See ROI at 64. She also took issue with
her non-selection for a Psychology Technician position because she is “very
well qualified,” but admitted that she does not know anything about the
qualifications of the Selectee and insisted that she believed it was retaliation
for taking time off work because of her injury. See ROI at 65-67.

Complainant’s Supervisor explained that Complainant was initially marked
AWOL because she had used up all her annual leave and sick leave. See ROI
at 111. He asserted that after Complainant submitted her FMLA form along
with a request for Leave Without Pay, he passed it on to the Warden for
approval and once the Warden approved the request, Complainant’s time
sheet was changed to reflect LWOP. See ROI at 111. He stated that the
Agency offered Complainant a light duty position through workers’
compensation to accommodate her physical restrictions, but that Complainant
refused the offer, requesting a new light duty position with no contact with
inmates but that was not possible because there is no position available at the
facility that does not involve contact with inmates. See ROI at 112-13. He
asserted that shortly afterwards, Complainant took another job at the VA. See
ROI at 113. He further stated that Complainant’s other request of additional
time to perform her duties could not be accommodated because extending
work hours and paying overtime is not permitted as a reasonable
accommodation. See ROI at 113-14.

The Business Administrator, who also supervised Complainant for a time,
asserted that from her own observation, Complainant had difficulty completing
all her assigned tasks, saying that she would assign Complainant duties after
Complainant said that she wanted to do them but then Complainant would
                                        3                           2023001104

turn out not to be able to complete them and so another employee would have
to do those tasks as well. See ROI at 242-44.

The Warden stated that he was not aware that Complainant had a disability.
See ROI at 152. He asserted that he was the selecting official for the position
and evaluated all the candidates based on their experience, past evaluation
ratings, relevant education, reference checking, and the Associate Warden’s
recommendations. See ROI at 156-58. The record indicates that the Selectee
had a master’s degree in psychology and had worked at another location in
the Agency for more than five years at the time of the selection as well as
having years of other relevant experience with other employers. See
Supplemental ROI at 53-59.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge,
or a final decision from the agency. When Complainant requested a final
Agency decision, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant did not prove that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed
the instant appeal.

Complainant did not file a brief on appeal but submitted some additional
evidence which purported to support her claims. The Agency filed a brief
urging that its decision be affirmed.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).           See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and
relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the
Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).
To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the
three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973).
                                       4                          2023001104

A complainant must initially establish a prima facie case by demonstrating
that he/she was subjected to an adverse employment action under
circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco
Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case
will vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas,
441 U.S. at 802 n.13. The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty.
Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail, a
complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson
Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v.
Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

We find that the record does not support Complainant’s assertions that she
was subjected to disparate treatment. The Agency articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions and Complainant offered nothing
beyond her own unsupported assertions to indicate that the Agency’s reasons
were a pretext. Complainant does not dispute that she did not have annual
leave or sick leave available when she submitted her request for FMLA leave
and the Supervisor explained that Complainant was only marked AWOL until
her request for FMLA was approved and then her time sheet was changed to
reflect LWOP. The Warden explained that he selected the Selectee based on
her past experiences and relevant education.            Complainant cannot
demonstrate pretext based on her own subjective assessment of her own
qualifications.   See Palmer N. v. Dep’t of Defense, EEOC Appeal No.
0120140070 (March 18, 2016). The Commission has repeatedly stated that
mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is a pretext for
intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief, however
genuine, does not constitute evidence of pretext. See Charlie O. v. Dep’t of
the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2021002639 (March 29, 2022); Juliet B. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019).

We further find that the record does not establish that the Agency violated the
Rehabilitation Act. The record indicates that the Agency offered Complainant
a light duty assignment to accommodate Complainant’s physical restrictions
and try to limit her contact with inmates but Complainant refused it and asked
for a position that would have no contact with inmates, and the Supervisor
stated that there are no positions at the facility that do not have contact with
inmates.

In addition, Complainant’s own position description provides ample evidence
that contact with inmates was an essential function of Complainant’s position.
                                       5                           2023001104

It is well-settled that the law does not require an agency to remove essential
functions through the reasonable accommodation process. See Lynette B. v.
Dep’t of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 2019003392 (Aug. 25, 2022). Moreover,
to the extent Complainant requested to be able to work overtime in order to
complete her duties, that amounted to a request to lower her performance
standards, and the Commission has long held that the Agency is not required
under the Rehabilitation Act to lower the performance standards of a position
to accommodate an individual with a disability. See Complainant v. Dep’t of
Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 0120122978 (Sept. 19, 2014). Under the
circumstances, we find that the Agency did not violate the Rehabilitation Act
when it denied Complainant her request for an accommodation.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the
party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support
of the request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the
request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar
days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which
to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                        6                           2023001104

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs.
                                       7                           2023001104

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action,
you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit
the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney
directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


February 17, 2026
Date
