           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Jackson D., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                         United States Postal Service,
                                   Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024003719

                         Agency No. 4J-530-0113-23

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s May 3, 2024, final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. and the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For
the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a City Carrier Assistant, Q-01, at the Agency’s Four Mile
Station Post Office in Racine, Wisconsin. On December 30, 2024, Complainant
filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination by the Agency on the bases of
disability (fractured knees) and age (over 40) when on September 8, 2023,
Complainant was terminated from her position during her probationary period.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024003719

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request
a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the
Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), which
concluded that Complainant failed to prove her claim of discrimination. This
appeal followed, but Complainant offers no arguments in support.

We find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
removing Complainant. Here, the record reflects that Complainant did not
return to work after fracturing her knees on July 14, 2023. Although
Complainant claimed that she requested light duty and notified her managers
of her medical condition, the record contains no indication that the responsible
management officials were aware of Complainant’s request. Moreover, while
the record shows that the Agency attempted to contact Complainant to inquire
about her absences, there is no indication in the record that Complainant
complied with the instructions contained in the two letters informing her that
she was Absent Without Leave (AWOL). We note that on July 25, 2023, the
Agency sent Complainant a letter informing her that she had not been to work
in over a week and that it “is mandatory that you make a written request to
be placed in a leave status.” On August 1, 2023, the Agency sent Complainant
a letter informing her that she had not been to work in over two weeks and
instructing her to report to work on August 3, 2023, “so that management
may investigate your continued absence.” Complainant’s supervisors
thereafter requested, on August 8, 2023, that she be disciplined for “no call
no show.”

We ultimately find no persuasive evidence that the removal action was based
on discriminatory animus. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision
finding no discrimination.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
                                        3                           2024003719

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision.
                                       4                           2024003719

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that
person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the
dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work.
If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signa
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 3, 2025
Date
