                                        2                            2026001323

On May 29, 2025, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the basis of race (Black) when on February 26, 2025,
he was denied two hours begin tour overtime and given an investigative interview
for reporting early.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision
concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. Thereafter, Complainant filed the instant appeal.

The Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions as
management noted on February 26, 2025, Complainant reported to work at 1200
claiming his start time was 1400, despite Complainant being assigned a start time
of 1600. The Time and Attendance report in the record reflects that since
December 2024, Complainant’s start time was 1600. Person A stated she was the
manager the week of February 26, 2025, and had been advised that employees
should not be working outside of their start time. Supervisor Distribution
Operations (SDO) stated Complainant was told the start time for his bid was 1600
and noted a begin tour of 1200 would have placed him out of schedule. Manager
Distribution Operations (MDO) stated that despite being told not to come in early,
Complainant continued to do so and thus, an investigation was conducted to find
out why he was coming in early. The Agency noted the investigative interview did
not result in any corrective or disciplinary action, which Complainant does not
dispute.
On appeal, Complainant states he thought Person A told the Plant Manager he was
working out of his schedule and believes this all stemmed from something Person
A thought Complainant said and from listening to a coworker’s incorrect
information about him. Complainant has not shown that any similarly situated
persons were treated more favorably than Complainant regarding these issues.
Upon review, we find that Complainant failed to prove by a preponderance of
evidence that the Agency’s actions were pretext for discrimination.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.
                                         3                             2026001323

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           4                              2026001323

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:

_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector

June 3, 2026
Date
