           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Mario L., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                 Secretary,
                        Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                  Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024004164

                     Agency No. 2004-460-2023-152817

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s June 6, 2024, final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Clinical Pharmacist, GS-13, at the VA Medical Center in
Wilmington, Delaware.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024004164

On August 31, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency on the bases of national origin (Albanian),
religion (Muslim) 2, sex (male), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
when:

    1. In February 2023, Complainant was not informed he would receive
       benefits if he obtained a VA license to issue controlled substance
       medications.

    2. On April 5, 2023, Complainant was excluded from a meeting with facility
       senior leadership.

    3. On May 1, 2023, Associate Chief (AC) issued Complainant an
       unsuccessful rating on his mid-term performance.

    4. On May 10, and May 24, 2023, Complainant was omitted from the
       meeting notes on the weekly pharmacy department meetings.

    5. On June 2, 2023, AC changed Complainant’s responsibilities from Pain
       Specialist to Patient Aligned Care Teams (PACT) Pain Pharmacist,
       effective July 1, 2023.

While the Agency accepted claims 1-2 and 4-5 for investigation, the Agency
declined to accept claim 3 as a discrete act, as the Agency found the claim to
be untimely raised. However, the Agency nevertheless investigated this claim
as background evidence.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant
did not prove that the Agency subjected him to harassment or discrimination
as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

Having reviewed the record, we find that even if Complainant established a
prima facie case of discrimination, the Agency articulated a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for changing his responsibilities.

2
 Complainant clarified that he was Agnostic, but his cultural religion is Muslim,
and others connected him to the Muslim faith due to his last name.
                                       3                          2024004164

Specifically, management explained that while Complainant’s title changed
following the Agency’s establishment of a new pain clinic, Complainant’s
responsibilities did not change. As Complainant offers no persuasive evidence
of pretext, we find that he cannot prevail on his allegations of disparate
treatment.

As for his allegations of harassment, Complainant alleges that he was
subjected to harassment when he was not informed regarding benefits he
could receive with additional licensing and omitted and excluded from
meetings and meeting notes. However, we note that management vehemently
denied Complainant’s allegations. As Complainant failed to demonstrate that
the alleged incidents occurred, we find that Complainant cannot prevail on
these claims. As for the unsuccessful rating, while management confirmed
that Complainant initially received an unsuccessful rating due to his failure to
meet the requisite productivity standard, that rating was later upgraded to
“fully successful” based on Complainant’s improvement. As we find no
persuasive evidence of discriminatory animus, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request
for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from
receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit
a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                        4                           2024004164

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.
                                       5                           2024004164

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:



________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signa
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 6, 2026
Date
