           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                  Arlette W., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                               Dr. Troy E. Meink,
                                   Secretary,
                           Department of the Air Force,
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2026001538

                            Agency No. 7I0J2400777

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of
employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Water Treatment Plant Operator at the Agency’s Luke Air Force
Base in Arizona.

On November 7, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work environment
on the bases of sex (female) and race (Black/Creole) when:

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2026001538

      1. In August 2024, the Water and Fuel Systems Maintenance Supervisor (S1)
         was yelling and ranting at Complainant while accusing Complainant of
         being lazy and a liar and screaming at Complainant to do what he says and
         other words to that affect;
      2. S1 allegedly held Complainant to a different standard in comparison to
         other employees; and
      3. On or around June – July 2024, S1 allegedly made statements against
         Native American Contractors, such as: “Hiring Indians and minorities to
         rob the government,” “they're lazy,” and “those companies who do real
         work can't get hired because there's a law that minorities have to get hired
         first and it's not fair, they're lazy!” or words to that affect.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant did not
prove that she was subjected to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed
the instant appeal.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, we find that the alleged incidents were more
likely the result of routine supervision, personality conflicts, and general workplace
disputes and are therefore insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a
discriminatory hostile work environment.

In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the alleged
conduct was based on discriminatory animus. Regarding the comments allegedly
made about minority contractors and diversity hiring, Complainant acknowledged
that the wording may have been different than originally recalled. Notwithstanding,
none of the alleged comments were directed at Complainant, referenced her race or
sex, or were connected to any personnel action affecting her employment.

The record further reflects that the dispute between Complainant and S1 centered
primarily on disagreements regarding work assignments, operational procedures,
inspections, laboratory testing, and supervisory oversight.
                                           3                               2026001538

Throughout her affidavit, Complainant repeatedly characterized the conflict as
stemming from her belief that S1 lacked technical knowledge and expected her to
perform duties she considered improper or outside her position. Such disagreements
concerning management decisions, workplace expectations, and supervisory style
do not establish discrimination under Title VII. Although Complainant alleged that
she was treated differently than others, S1 stated that he did not treat Complainant
differently and noted that each shift had different responsibilities and duties to
perform during their shifts.

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment regarding
her claims, Complainant has not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the
Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination.

                                   CONCLUSION

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration.
                                           4                              2026001538

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request
for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                           5                              2026001538

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


June 25, 2026
Date
