           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                    Tien E., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                                 Todd Blanche,
                            Acting Attorney General,
                              Department of Justice
                           (Federal Bureau of Prisons),
                                     Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2026000820

                          Agency No. BOP-2022-01043

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 10, 2025, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §621
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Case Manager, GS-0101-11 at the Agency’s Metropolitan Detention
Center facility in Guaynabo, Puerto Rico. Complainant sought EEO counseling and
subsequently filed a formal complaint on November 9, 2022.

1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2026000820

Complainant alleged that she was subjected to discrimination on the bases of
national origin (Hispanic) and age (over 40) when from August 4, 2022, to
November 8, 2022:

   1. Complainant’s office was moved.

   2. Complainant was treated in an unequitable manner regarding lunch reliefs.

   3. Complainant was rated fully satisfactory on her performance evaluation.

Complainant also alleged that she was subjected to discrimination on the bases of
national origin (Hispanic), age (over 40), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity when from November 17, 2022, to November 18, 2022:

   4. Complainant’s office was moved, management intentionally excluded
      Complainant from receiving emails from management regarding work
      schedule, and duty hour changes.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ), or a final Agency decision. 29 C.F.R.
§1614.108(f). Complainant requested a final Agency decision. On December 10,
2025, the Agency issued a decision finding no discrimination. Thereafter,
Complainant filed the instant appeal.

We find the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
Regarding claim 1, the Unit Manager, the Associate Warden, and other facility staff
consistently explained that they moved Complainant given her ongoing, tense
relationship with Case Manager 1. The Associate Warden stated that they moved
both Complainant and Case Manager 1 to different floors, and that management held
meetings with both parties. The Unit Manager confirmed that management assigned
Complainant to the second level to avoid any interaction between the two during a
pending investigation. Both Complainant and Case Manager 1 described their
personal issues with each other that escalated before the move.
                                            3                               2026000820

As to claim 2, the Unit Manager asserted that Complainant’s lunch relief
assignments were based on staff availability. The Unit Manager noted that during
September 2022, when Complainant had seven lunch relief assignments, another
counselor had eight. The Unit Manager also noted that Unit B includes seven staff
members, and at that time, there were two staff vacancies and two staff members on
leave.

With respect to claim 3, the Unit Manager explained that he started having concerns
with Complainant’s performance after the incident with Case Manager 1 and
Complainant’s move to another floor. The Unit Manager indicated that Complainant
stopped completing duties like picking up the legal binder on the third floor. The
Unit Manager stated that even though he gave her a Fully Satisfactory rating,
Complainant had not been completing her obligations. The Unit Manager stated that
he had communications with Complainant regarding his concerns prior to issuing
the Fully Satisfactory rating. The Unit Manager explained that he rated Complainant
Fully Satisfactory in all five elements for two quarters, and Complainant refused to
sign those quarterly performance evaluations.

Concerning claim 4, the Unit Manager explained that this incident occurred
following the Warden’s last-minute request for unit assistance with an inmate airlift
during an early morning shift. The Unit Manager stated that, normally, management
discourages the readjustment of staff to morning watch if they are assigned to day
shifts. The Unit Manager said that Complainant was assigned to the day shift and
scheduled to stay back in the office while the rest of the unit assisted with the airlift.
The Unit Manager mentioned that Complainant had worked the prior day, and when
the plans changed he was unable to reach Complainant because he did not have her
contact information. We find Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.


                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
                                           4                               2026000820

      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                           5                              2026000820

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                            Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


June 30, 2026
Date
