           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                   Ardelia I.,1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                               Dr. Troy E. Meink,
                                   Secretary,
                           Department of the Air Force,
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2023002994

                         Agency No. 9M0R2100070F23

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
March 13, 2023, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621
et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final
decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Contracting Specialist at the Agency’s Joint Base Elmendorf-
Richardson in Alaska.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                         2                              2023002994

On March 11, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination
by the Agency on the bases of race (African-American), sex (female), color (Black),
age (YOB: 1946), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when:

   1. She was subjected to numerous incidents of harassment from a number of her
      supervisors and co-workers;
   2. On April 8, 2021, her supervisor, the Supervisory Contract Specialist
      (Supervisor 1) failed to support Complainant’s application for a Contracting
      Officer’s Warrant career progression opportunity after providing that
      opportunity to two white males;
   3. On April 26, 2021, the Chief of CE Services Flight (Flight Chief 1) failed to
      submit Complainant’s Contracting Officer’s Warrant package for career
      progression and stated, “I was advised that you have an active EEO complaint
      that includes your request for a warrant. As such, I have decided that it would
      not be prudent for me as the new Flight Chief to make a decision in regard to
      your warrant until the EEO complaint has been processed and adjudicated.”

Complainant stated that she has been subjected to numerous incidents of harassment
based on her race, color, sex, and age because no GS-12 supervisory contract
specialist position has been held by a “senior person with dark skin.” See Report of
Investigation (ROI) at 634. She asserted that she is the only person who knows
special contract utilities and within months of being hired, she made changes that
did contracting according to the laws and regulations and increased the funding for
utilities. See ROI at 637. She took issue with management issuing her a
memorandum of proposed suspension that was then changed to a Memorandum of
Expectations, warning Complainant about her communications with coworkers
being “confrontational” and “inflammatory,” as well as with being “presumptuous
and unprofessional.” See ROI at 302-304. She asserted that management has always
sided with her coworkers who use disrespectful and unprofessional language against
her but then punish her for speaking up for herself. See ROI at 637-38.

The record indicates that in April 2020, Complainant and a Contracting Officer (Co-
worker 1) exchanged a series of increasingly contentious emails which revolved
around Co-worker 1 beginning a message to Complainant with “Ma.” rather than
“Ms.”, which Complainant took offense at and for which Co-worker 1 apologized,
explaining that it was a typographical error caused by her phone’s autocorrect that
she sent before realizing it. See ROI at 278-83.
                                          3                              2023002994

In response, Complainant sent an email in which she stated, “It may be difficult for
[Co-worker 1] to switch from the parenting role to the business role while in the
teleworking environment; but it is required,” and stating that “Co-worker 1] behavior
(sic) does not need nor have the right to lecture or scold me for any reason,” and that
it was intolerable for Co-worker 1 to do so. See ROI at 280. Complainant later sent
an email to Co-worker 1 and Supervisor 1 in which she stated that “as Contracting
Officer [Co-worker 1] appears to consistently violate CO duties and her
responsibilities as outlined in [Agency policy.] It also appears that she has a problem
understanding materials written by the people of color and those past the age of 50.”
See ROI at 565. In response, Co-worker 1 responded saying that Complainant was
“making accusations and disparaging comments” that were “unprofessional and
completely uncalled for,” and asserting that Complainant was creating a hostile work
environment for her. See ROI at 550. Supervisor 1 explained that after she reviewed
Complainant’s and Co-worker 1’s communications and consulted with HR, she was
informed that Complainant’s email was “inciting,” and that in her opinion, Co-
worker 1 had not been ”overbearing or demanding,” while Complainant’s response
was immediately “accusatory.” See ROI at 663. She stated that she informed
Complainant she was considering disciplinary action and the Memorandum of
Expectations was only to remind Complainant to conduct herself in a professional
manner. See ROI at 663.

Complainant asserted that Supervisor 1 failed to support her application for a
Contracting Officer’s Warrant even though two white males with less contracting
experience than she has were approved and that without a Contracting Officer’s
Warrant, you cannot get a promotion. See ROI at 641. She stated that a Contracting
Officer’s Warrant is required for every position above a GS-12 because a warranted
specialist has to tell people what to do according to the SCPD. See ROI at 641. She
asserted that later in August 2020, the Flight Chief came to her in the hallway and
asked her if she would be interested in submitting a warrant package for utilities
contracts and contract closeouts, which she described as a “conditional warrant,” and
she declined because she knew she was qualified for an unconditional warrant and
she was not going to agree with being treated differently. See ROI at 642-43. She
asserted that she is sure she has been overlooked because management expects
people to “meet their personal standard” and she does “not fit their bill,” because she
is black, female, and because anyone over the age of 50 is overlooked. See ROI at
643.
                                          4                              2023002994

Supervisor 1 explained that there are various factors that play into whether an
individual is warranted that includes, but are not limited to, the workload the
individual would have and the needs of the Contracting Squadron to meet the
mission. See ROI at 664. She stated that her response to Complainant was not a
refusal but only told Complainant, “I am reviewing your past projects and the
coming opportunities, and will be able to provide you with a response next week.”
See ROI at 664. She asserted that later, it was determined that the decision to obtain
a warrant is at the Flight Chief’s level, but Complainant immediately assumed that
her response was negative and went over her head to the Flight Chief anyway. See
ROI at 665. She further denied that becoming a warranted contracting officer is a
requirement for being promoted, noting that contracting officers include multiple
grades. See ROI at 665.

The Flight Chief explained that his role in the process is to verify the information in
the warrant package and make a determination as to the candidate’s qualifications to
be considered for appointment, which serves as a recommendation to the appointing
official. See ROI at 676-77. He stated that the regulations require consideration of
the complexity and dollar value of the acquisitions to be assigned and the candidate’s
experience, training, education, business acumen, judgment, character and
reputation. See ROI at 677. He asserted that he did not deny the warrant. See ROI
at 676. He clarified to Complainant in an email that because he was the new Flight
Chief, he felt it was necessary to do due diligence and that he would not be taking
any decisive action at that time because he was still “working to understand the scope
of our mission, the knowledge, skills and abilities of the flight’s workforce, as well
as the size and complexity of the workload.” See ROI at 622. He also stated that he
wanted to have time to “become familiar with [her] knowledge, skills and abilities
as a contracting professional, gain insight into [her] experience and the types and
levels of complexity of work [she was] capable of performing.” See ROI at 622.
The Squadron Commander stated that after Complainant forwarded him the email
from the Flight Chief, he told the Flight Chief that his email referencing
Complainant’s EEO complaint was not acceptable, which the Flight Chief
acknowledged and apologized for and the Flight Chief was also counseled on the
matter. See ROI at 742.

The record indicates that Complainant retired as of March 28, 2023.
                                          5                              2023002994

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge, or a final
decision from the agency. When Complainant requested a final Agency decision,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision
concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected her to
harassment or a hostile work environment as alleged in claims 1 and 2, but concluded
that Complainant had established per se reprisal for claim 3.2 The Agency stated
that it would commit to Complainant that it would refrain from any unlawful
practices in the future and stated that Complainant was entitled to compensatory
damages and attorney’s fees. 3 Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

Neither Complainant nor the Agency filed a brief on appeal.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the
Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at 9-16 (Aug. 5,
2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the Commission
examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and
testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

We find that the record does not establish that Complainant was subjected to
unlawful harassment.




2
  Because the Agency’s finding of per se reprisal was in Complainant’s favor, it is
affirmed as unchallenged on appeal. See Kathey Z. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec’y,
EEOC Appeal No. 2023000169 (June 16, 2025).
3
  Thereafter, the Agency issued a final Agency decision awarding Complainant
$3,000 in compensatory damages. Complainant appealed and on appeal, the
Commission increased Complainant’s award of compensatory damages to $5,000.
See Tressa L. v. Dep’t of the Air Force, Appeal No. 2023004156 (April 23, 2025).
                                          6                              2023002994

As an initial matter, we find that the record does not support that Complainant was
subjected to an adverse action in claim 2 because Supervisor 1 did not take any
decisive action on Complainant’s warrant request, only telling Complainant that she
would review it later and it was Complainant who immediately assumed that
Supervisor 1 was refusing to support her warrant application. Contrary to
Complainant’s arguments, the mere fact that Complainant is a member of her
protected classes does not, absent more, establish that any of the alleged incidents of
harassment were due to any of her protected bases. See Sylvester C. v. Dep’t of
Health and Human Srvcs., EEOC Appeal No. 0320160058 (Oct. 7, 2016). While it
is clear that Complainant took offense at the communication from Co-worker 1
where she was addressed as “Ma” rather than “Ms.”, the record indicates that this
single incident was a typographical error for which Co-worker 1 apologized. In
addition, we find that the evidence in the record indicates that the other emails which
Complainant took exception to were all normal workplace interactions about work
assignments and how work should be done and it was, in fact, Complainant whose
confrontational responses escalated any tension and led to her increasingly
contentious interpersonal exchanges with her supervisors and co-workers. For
example, we note that even after Co-worker 1 explained and apologized for her error
in mistakenly addressing Complainant as “Ma,” Complainant responded by accusing
Co-worker 1 of “[having] a problem understanding materials written by the people
of color and those past the age of 50.” See ROI at 565.

Moreover, we find that all the alleged incidents of harassment amount to little more
than common workplace tribulations such as tense interpersonal relationships with
a supervisor or coworkers and routine work assignments, instructions, and
admonishments that do not rise to the level of an unlawful hostile work environment.
See Arthur J. v. Social Sec’y Admin., EEOC Appeal No. 0120142985 (Feb. 28,
2017). The Commission has repeatedly stated that EEO laws are not a civility code
and forbids “only behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the conditions of the
victim's employment.” See Aracely J. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
2019002678 (June 11, 2019); Floyd L. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
2019001852 (April 3, 2019). Finally, Complainant’s subjective assertion that she
found her supervisors’ and coworkers’ actions to be hostile and disrespectful are not
sufficient to meet the objective standard required to establish unlawful harassment.
See Harris v. Forklift Systems, 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993) (“Conduct that is not severe
or pervasive enough to create an objectively hostile or abusive work environment --
an environment that a reasonable person would find hostile or abusive -- is beyond
Title VII’s purview.”).
                                           7                               2023002994

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination with respect to claims 1 and 2 and finding that
Complainant was subjected to reprisal with respect to claim 3. The agency’s order
and obligation to provide the training it previously indicated it would complete
remains in place.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507.
                                           8                              2023002994

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be
deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of
the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         9                              2023002994

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________              Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


June 3, 2026
Date
