           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Sandy S., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                  David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                          United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                     Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024002919

                         Agency No. 1C-931-0050-23

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s March 11, 2024, final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Maintenance Support Clerk at the Agency’s Charlotte,
North Carolina Processing and Distribution Center in Charlotte, North Carolina.
On February 24, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination and harassment by the Agency on the bases of race
(Black/African American), sex (female), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity when: Complainant’s workstation was moved; her supervisor came
into the office to see what she was doing; her supervisor called on her work

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                           2024002919

phone five to 10 minutes after leaving the office; Complainant was not paid
for the sick leave she requested; and management “stalked and
micromanaged” Complainant.

The Agency initially dismissed the complaint for failure to state a claim and
failure to bring one of the matters to the attention of an EEO counselor. In
EEOC Appeal No. 2023003008 (Sept. 13, 2023), the Commission reversed the
Agency’s final decision and remanded the complaint for further processing,
finding that the Agency improperly dismissed the complaint for failure to state
a claim and failure to bring one of the incidents to the attention of an EEO
Counselor.

Following an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of
the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29
C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), which concluded that Complainant did not prove that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the
instant appeal.

Having reviewed the record, we find that Complainant cannot prevail on the
merits of her complaint. Even if we assume arguendo that Complainant
established a prima facie case of discrimination, we find that the Agency
articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.

With respect to Complainant’s workstation, management explained that
Complainant requested repositioning/reconfiguring of her desk, but the panel
needed for the reconfiguration had to be acquired from other stations and
branches. Complainant was informed that it could occur while she was on
leave. While Complainant argues on appeal that coworkers outside of her
protected classes were allowed to be present during reconfiguration,
management officials asserted that they were not scheduled for leave like
Complainant during the period when the materials were secured.

Regarding the denied sick leave, the record revealed that there were
adjustments to Complainant’s pay concerning sick leave during the relevant
period. While there were errors in correctly inputting Complainant’s time,
there are no indications that the errors were based on discriminatory or
retaliatory animus. Rather, the record reflects that there was confusion as to
who was responsible for Complainant’s leave slips when Complainant gave her
                                       3                           2024002919

leave slip to a maintenance supervisor on her shift that was outside her chain
of command.

On appeal, Complainant presents no persuasive arguments as to pretext.
Consequently, we find that she failed to prove her allegations of disparate
treatment.

As for the remaining claims, even assuming the alleged incidents occurred as
described by Complainant, we find that they were more likely the result of
routine supervision, personality conflicts, and general workplace disputes and
are therefore insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a discriminatory
hostile work environment and unlikely to deter protected activity. Moreover,
we note that the Agency offered to internally investigate Complainant’s
allegations of harassment. However, Complainant declined to participate in
the Agency’s investigation into her allegations. As Complainant failed to take
advantage of the Agency’s remedial measures to address the alleged
harassment, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can   be     found      at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                        4                           2024002919

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
                                       5                          2024002919

appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




_________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s sign
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 30, 2025
Date
