                                           2                              2025001578

bases of sex (male), disability (mental and physical), and age (46) when, on or
around January of 2024, he was excessed from a Level 9 Mail Processing Equipment
(MPE) position to a PS-4 Laborer Custodial position and was told that there were no
PS-9 Maintenance Mechanic MPE positions available. However, in March 2024, he
became aware that PS-9 positions were available, but management refused to place
him in such a position.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant did not
prove that he was subjected to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the
instant appeal.

Aside from Complainant’s bare assertions, the evidence does not demonstrate that
the Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination. The Labor
Relations Specialist explained that Complainant and others were offered several
Maintenance Mechanic MPE PS-9 positions, but Complainant returned his
preference package unsigned and forfeited his opportunity to choose a position
during the first phase of the process. As a result, rather than being placed in a lower-
level position, he was offered an available Maintenance Mechanic MPE PS-9
vacancy at the Dallas, Texas Network Distribution Center or, in the alternative, a
PS-4 Laborer Custodial position at the new Regional Processing and Distribution
Center in Palmetto, Georgia. Complainant chose the latter and declined his retreat
rights to the North Metro Processing and Distribution Center.

Therefore, based on our review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
                                           3                               2025001578

      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                           4                              2025001578

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 5, 2026
Date
