           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                   Robert F.,1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                                 David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                           United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025001469

                          Agency No. 4G-006-0034-24

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
December 16, 2024 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section
501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §
791 et seq For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final
decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Sales, Services Distribution Associate Clerk at the Agency’s Post
Office in Rio Blanco, Puerto Rico.


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025001469

On April 10, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the bases of
disability (Spina Bifida-Occulta) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity
when:

      1. Since January 2020, Complainant was denied a reasonable
         accommodation of the use of a cane;
      2. On or around February 10, 2023, Complainant was issued a Letter of
         Decision for his Notice of Proposed Removal (NOPR);
      3. On July 2023, Complainant’s mail with a global settlement check was
         intercepted by management, opened and held at the Post Office until
         Complainant inquired about it; and
      4. Complainant was denied a supervisory position due to his Family and
         Medical Leave (FMLA) leave.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant did not
prove that he was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. Complainant
then filed the instant appeal.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, the Commission finds that Complainant
failed to establish that the challenged actions were based on discriminatory or
retaliatory animus. With respect to his removal, management explained that the
decision was based on Complainant’s prolonged unsatisfactory attendance,
documented as AWOL and unscheduled leave, and that multiple attempts were made
to address his absences. As to the settlement check, management explained that the
check was safeguarded after it was inadvertently opened because it was addressed
to the Postmaster and later released to Complainant upon verification of his identity.
Finally, regarding the alleged denial of an acting supervisory position, the record
contained no evidence that Complainant requested or was denied a 204-B
assignment. Complainant has not produced persuasive evidence demonstrating that
the Agency’s explanations were pretext for retaliation or discrimination.
                                           3                               2025001469

Regarding the reasonable accommodation claim, the record demonstrates that
Complainant informed the Agency that he needed to walk with a cane and could not
perform the duties of his position. Management was placed on long-term leave
without pay (LWOP) as there were no available vacant, funded positions within his
restrictions. Complainant failed to identify a vacant funded position he could
perform with or without reasonable accommodation.

Finally, to the extent that Complainant alleged that he was subjected to
a hostile work environment, that allegation is precluded by the determination above
that the Agency's actions were not based on discriminatory or retaliatory
animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21,
2000).

                                   CONCLUSION

Upon careful review of the entire record and the parties’ arguments on appeal, we
conclude that the preponderance of the evidence does not establish that Complainant
was subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile work environment as alleged.
Therefore, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration.
                                           4                              2025001469

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request
for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                           5                              2025001469

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________               Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 20, 2026
Date
