                                        2                             2025001160

On June 14, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him based on disability when, since a date to be specified,
Complainant was not accommodated per his medical restrictions when he was not
permitted to work.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ).
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29
C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. Complainant filed the instant
appeal but did not file a brief in support of his appeal.

Upon careful review the evidence of record, we conclude the Agency’s finding of
no discrimination is consistent with the law and facts of record. Notably,
Complainant indicated that he was alleging that he was not accommodated per his
medical restrictions but stated that he submitted a letter from his medical service
provider indicating that he was fully cleared to return to work but that management
made false statements about his disability and would not allow him to return to
work.

The record indicates that on January 16, 2024, Manager received a phone call from
Complainant and found him to be incoherent while on his delivery route.
Supervisor was sent to check on Complainant and found Complainant slouched
down in front of his postal vehicle. Supervisor observed Complainant’s hands and
arms shaking, and he was drooling from the mouth sideways Complainant refused
medical treatment from paramedics. The paramedics advised that Complainant
should not be driving. Complainant submitted a January 17, 2024, letter from a
medical service provider that generally stated that Complainant as under the
provider’s neurological care and, “From a neurological standpoint the patient is
cleared to drive at this time.” When management asked Complainant to provide
additional medical documentation regarding his disability, he refused and stated
that he would not release his protected medical information. The Agency did not
allow Complainant to return to work without providing further medical
documentation or allowing the Agency to contact Complainant’s medical provider.
                                         3                             2025001160

Complainant has not presented any evidence that persuasively suggests that the
Agency was unlawfully motivated by his disability. Complainant has not
identified any similarly situated employees outside his protected classes that were
treated more favorably than him. Furthermore, Complainant has not met his
burden of rebutting the Agency’s asserted nondiscriminatory reasons for its
actions.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507.
                                           4                              2025001160

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be
deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of
the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025001160

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



______________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 18, 2026
Date
