           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                   Tianna D., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                                 David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                           United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025001814

                          Agency No. 4B-230-0195-24

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 27, 2025, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the
following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Bulk Mail Technician at the Agency’s Merrifield Post Office in
Merrifield, Virginia.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025001814

On July 8, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination by
the Agency on the bases of race (Asian), national origin (Pakistani), religion (Islam),
and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

   1. On November 28, 2023, Complainant’s request for extended Leave Without
      Pay (LWOP) was denied;
   2. On April 22, 2024, Complainant was issued a Notice of 7-Day Suspension;
   3. On July 1, 2024, Complainant was issued a Notice of 14-Day Suspension;
   4. On October 21, 2022, and continuing, Complainant was not provided with
      mandatory training and portal access; and
   5. On a date to be specified, Complainant was not given an annual uniform
      allowance.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f) the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), which concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

Upon careful review of the record, we find that Complainant cannot prevail on the
merits of her complaint. Assuming, for the sake of argument, that Complainant
established a prima facie case of discrimination, the Agency proffered legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Regarding Claim 1, the Agency explained
that management denied Complainant’s request for six months of LWOP based on
the needs of the Agency. The Agency emphasized that management tried to work
with Complainant to address her childcare needs but ultimately could not excuse her
from work for six months. For Claims 2 and 3, the Agency denied that
Complainant’s protected classes were the reason for taking the alleged disciplinary
actions. Rather, the Agency maintained that management took the alleged personnel
actions based on Complainant’s attendance issues, for which she had been counseled
previously and failed to correct. Regarding Claim 4, the Agency denied
Complainant’s allegation and maintained that management did not recall ever
denying Complainant training or access to the portal. As for Claim 5, the Agency
explained that Complainant was entitled to a uniform allowance. However, she was
so concerned about getting her leave excused that she did not raise the allowance
issue with management, and management overlooked the issue.
                                           3                               2025001814

Based on our review of the record, including the contentions on appeal, we find no
persuasive evidence of pretext. While Complainant attributes the Agency’s actions
to discrimination, the record suggests that the alleged actions were largely based on
the Agency’s legitimate business reasons. Moreover, we find no persuasive evidence
that Complainant was denied training and/or a uniform allowance based on
discriminatory animus. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                           4                              2025001814

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025001814

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


May 4, 2026
Date
