           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Emerson S, 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                Douglas A. Tulino,
                          Acting Postmaster General,
                          United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                     Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2025002472

                         Agency No. 4B-070-0292-24

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s March 10, 2025, final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Sales, Services/Distribution Associate at the Agency’s
Camden Carrier Annex in Camden, New Jersey.

On July 22, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination
by the Agency on the bases of sex (male) and reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when:



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2025002472

1) Complainant alleged he was denied overtime opportunities; 2) He was
denied Leave; 3) He worked eight (8) hours and was denied breaks and lunch;
4) He was placed on "Deems Desirable" list, requiring him to submit
documentation to support each absence; 5) He was denied overtime
opportunities; 6) On dates not specified, management delayed box mail from
being sorted on time; 7) He had to work by himself; 8) He was given two
investigative interviews for the same incident; and 9) He was required to work
alone, which often caused him to work more than 6 hours without a break or
lunch. Complainant also alleged discriminatory harassment based retaliation
when: 10) his request for annual leave for October 7 - 11, 2024, was denied.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge,
or a final decision from the agency. When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision
concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination, reprisal, or harassment as alleged. Complainant then filed the
instant appeal.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).           See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and
relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the
Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

We find that the alleged incidents, even assuming they occurred as described
by Complainant, were more likely the result of routine supervision, personality
conflicts, and general workplace disputes and are therefore insufficiently
severe or pervasive to establish a discriminatory hostile work environment.
Furthermore, we find that the conduct was not sufficiently material to deter
protected activity. In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed
to show that the alleged conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory
animus.
                                       3                           2025002472

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment
regarding his claims, Complainant has not proffered any evidence
demonstrating that the Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for
discrimination or reprisal.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
                                        4                           2025002472

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests.
                                       5                           2025002472

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 27, 2025
Date
