                                       2                            2024001153

      1.    Since September 23, 2022, Complainant’s first-level supervisor (S1),
            Chief of Staff, has denied and/or failed to grant Complainant’s
            reasonable accommodation request.

      2.    On September 25, 2022, S1 denied Complainant’s request related to
            work duties.

      3.    On September 28, 2022, S1 failed to respond to Complainant’s
            request for a retention incentive award.

      4.    On October 21, 2022, S1 denied Complainant’s request for telework.

      5.    On October 31, 2022, S1 failed to respond to Complainant’s request
            for specific documentation regarding his allegation that Complainant
            should face disciplinary action.

      6.    On October 31, 2022, S1 did not provide Complainant with
            documentation for her Fiscal Year 2022 Performance Appraisal and
            Performance Pay.

      7.    On November 29, 2022, and December 6, 2022, S1 failed to grant
            Complainant’s Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) leave request
            in a timely manner.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s
request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
her to discrimination as alleged.

EEOC Regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b) requires an Agency to develop an
“impartial and appropriate factual record upon which to make findings on the
claims raised by the written complaint.” The investigative record in the instant
case is inadequate to draw conclusions on whether discrimination occurred.
                                        3                             2024001153

The record indicates that Complainant’s supervisor (S1), who played a central role
in several of Complainant’s claims, apparently mostly ceased communicating with
Complainant, failed to act on her leave requests, and did not issue her a
performance appraisal. The appraisal was ultimately completed by the Acting
Chief, but the record provides no explanation for S1’s lack of involvement. S1 did
not provide an affidavit, despite documented attempts by the investigator to obtain
his testimony. The Agency has not provided any explanation why S1 did not
provide an affidavit or what steps it took to obtain an affidavit from S1.

The decision also fails to specifically address Claim 3, in which Complainant
alleges she was denied a monetary retention incentive while two male employees
received one. The evidence provides some indication that Complainant was
eligible, but her request was never approved by S1, and management offers no
explanation for this discrepancy. In her affidavit, Complainant specifically
identified two male doctors that reportedly received their retention incentive in
December 2022. The investigator failed to ask the responding management
official regarding these asserted comparators.

The record indicates the investigator submitted several document requests to the
Agency’s EEO Program Manager requesting – among other documents –
Complainant’s telework and reasonable accommodation requests, her FMLA
request, and her retention incentive award documentation. The Agency failed to
provide the requested information. With respect to Claim 7, management’s stated
reason for the delay in processing Complainant’s FMLA request does not address
why S1 failed to respond to Complainant’s initial submission.

Given these deficiencies, we find that the record is insufficiently developed to
resolve the claims. As such we VACATE the Agency’s final decision and
REMAND the complaint to the Agency for further processing in accordance with
this decision and the Order herein.

                                     ORDER

Within 120 days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall conduct a
supplemental investigation to develop a complete and accurate factual record
regarding Complainant’s allegations. The Agency shall obtain all relevant evidence
necessary to address the investigative deficiencies identified in this decision,
including but not limited to the following:
                                        4                             2024001153

      1. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator re-attempts to obtain an
         affidavit from Supervisor 1 (S1). The affidavit shall address S1’s
         involvement in Complainant’s leave requests, performance appraisal,
         incentive award, and any communications or supervisory actions taken
         during the relevant period. The affidavit shall also address Complainant’s
         allegation that S1 failed to approve or act upon her requests. If S1 does
         not provide an affidavit, the Agency shall supplement the record with
         evidence showing what steps it has taken to obtain the affidavit and why
         S1 has not provided an affidavit.

      2. The Agency shall ensure that the investigator obtains all documentation
         and affidavits necessary to determine why Complainant did not receive
         the retention incentive for which she was allegedly eligible. The
         investigator shall obtain statements from the responsible officials
         involved in processing retention incentives, including S1, identifying the
         criteria used, the reasons Complainant’s request was not approved, and
         the circumstances surrounding the alleged approval of retention
         incentives for the two male comparators.


Upon completion of the investigation, the Agency must provide Complainant with
a copy of the supplemental record and findings. Complainant may, within 15 days
of receipt of the supplemental record, submit a statement concerning the
supplemental record. Thereafter, within 180 days of the date this decision is
issued, the Agency shall issue a new final decision with appeal rights to the
Commission.

     IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s
corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion
of each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector
EEO Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital format required by the
Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under which compliance
was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit
via FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the
Commission. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                         5                              2024001153

The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when previously
not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may
petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with
the Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for
enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying
complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42
U.S.C. 2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil
action, the administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition
for enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the
orders set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the
referral of this matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §
1614.503(f) for enforcement by that agency.
                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration.
                                         6                              2024001153

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s
request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in
opposition.    See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of
your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to
file such action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90)
calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. In the alternative, you
may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the
date you filed your complaint with the Agency or filed your appeal with the
Commission.
                                           7                              2024001153

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of
your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization,
and not the local office, facility or department in which you work. Filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


August 26, 2026
Date
