           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Sandy S., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                               Marco Rubio,
                                Secretary,
                            Department of State,
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024004971

                          Agency No. DOS-0031-24

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s September 5, 2024, final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Program Analyst within the Agency’s INL/Management Assistance Programs
facility in Washington, D.C.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                           2024004971

On December 11, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that
the Agency discriminated against him on the bases of veteran status 2, sex
(male), color (white), and disability when:

      He was subjected to a continuing violation of non-selection for Foreign
      Affairs Officer positions in the Bureau of International Narcotics and
      Law Enforcement Affairs (INL), most recently for vacancy #HRSC/INL
      2023-0051, on October 30, 2023.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did
not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove
that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. Complainant
filed the instant appeal.

Complainant has not presented any evidence that suggests that the Agency
was motivated by his protected classes. The record indicates that both
Human Resource Specialists that reviewed Complainant’s application and
determined he was ineligible were not aware of his protected classes. In
addition, the record indicates Complainant did not demonstrate the
specialized experience of developing, monitoring, and evaluating
regional/multi-country foreign assistant programs as required by the position
announcement or writing products such as speeches related to
counternarcotics and anti-crime programs or show experience liaising with
international organizations/officials on issues related to crimination justice as
required by the position. In addition, Complainant has not identified any
similarly situated employees outside his protected class that were treated
more favorably. There are no other specific positions Complainant has
identified for which he was not selected (or any that were timely raised with
an EEO Counselor).

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.




2
  The Agency properly dismissed the allegation of discrimination based on
veteran status for failure to state a claim under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1).
                                      3                           2024004971

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                       4                           2024004971

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing
acivil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________             Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations

September 4, 2025
Date
