           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                  Kandace I., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                                 Sean Duffy,
                                  Secretary,
                          Department of Transportation
                (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration),
                                   Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025003498

                      Agency No. 2024-00473-NHTSA-02

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
June 11, 2025, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint alleging employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the
following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Regional Administrator at the Agency’s Regional Operations and
Program Delivery facility in Lakewood, Colorado.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025003498

On October 18, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination
by the Agency on the bases of national origin (Hispanic) and reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when her Supervisor subjected her to numerous incidents of
harassment including, but not limited to, scrutinizing, denying, and delaying
Complainant’s travel requests; delayed approval of vacancies and denied
Complainant an additional full-time position; not approving Complainant’s Travel
Comp Time request; and subjecting Complainant to excessive micromanagement.

Complainant stated that her prior EEO activity was having a meeting with HR in
August 2022 about concerns she had with her Supervisor, alleging that her
Supervisor was obstructing her ability to perform her duties effectively. See Report
of Investigation (ROI) at 172. She admitted, however, that she did not mention any
protected basis in that meeting because at the time, she “did not know [her]
Supervisor’s motivation or intent.” See ROI at 172. She alleged that she is required
to have in-person interactions with public safety leaders in states within her region
but that her Supervisor has denied several of her travel requests while other Regional
Administrators have been permitted to attend local and state trips. See ROI at 173-
74. She asserted that she believes this is due to her national origin because her
Supervisor told her that her role was not to review Spanish-speaking materials for
states or partners, which she interpreted as discouragement from using her bilingual
skill-set. See ROI at 174.

Complainant further stated that in September 2024 she submitted a hiring package
to fill a vacancy using the Schedule A hiring authority but the Supervisor returned
the hiring package ten times, repeatedly seeking assurances that Complainant would
assign work based on the job description, citing concerns with the candidate’s past
law enforcement experience. See ROI at 176-77. Complainant asserted that another
Regional Administrator told her that the Supervisor “didn’t sit on” a request that the
other Regional Administrator made to fill a vacancy and that other regions have been
permitted to add a full-time employee while participating in the pilot staffing
program, but that her region has not. See ROI at 177. Complainant also took issue
with the Supervisor prohibiting her and her team from attending local and state
events even though their performance plans require them to visit each state at least
once a year and engage with state partners and stakeholders at least once a month.
See ROI at 179. Complainant further stated that the Supervisor denied her Travel
Comp Time request, stating that the request was not submitted in the proper format
although Complainant insisted that she had followed the sample formatting template.
See ROI at 183-84.
                                           3                              2025003498

Complainant insists that in general, the Supervisor has subjected her to unfair
scrutiny and denial of resources and that the Supervisor has a history of subjecting
Hispanic supervisors to excessive scrutiny. See ROI at 190.

The Supervisor stated that in August 2022, she asked Complainant to sign her
performance appraisal and Complainant responded in an email copying three HR
officials asking why her performance appraisal was not higher. The Supervisor
asserted that she explained to Complainant that she had made a mistake in the sub-
scoring but that it had not affected Complainant’s overall rating or compensation.
See ROI at 346. She asserted that she has had conversations with Complainant about
the frequency and nature of her travel, to try to balance her time out of office and
ensure that her trips are appropriate for her position and balancing on-site vs. virtual
attendance. See ROI at 347. She explained that at the time Complainant made her
travel requests, Complainant had already traveled to most of her states at least once,
as well as attending several other meetings so she asked Complainant to handle the
meetings by phone or Teams video call. See ROI at 347. She asserted that speaking
another language is not a requirement of the Regional Administrator position so it
would not be required for Complainant to attend an event merely because it was
Spanish-speaking. See ROI at 347. She explained that she permitted only some of
the regions to add a full-time position through the pilot staffing program and when
Complainant asked for another position, she answered, not at this time, and told
Complainant to focus on filling current vacancies. See ROI at 351. The Supervisor
further explained that for the hiring package that she questioned Complainant about,
she had concerns about the candidate’s job duties and the candidate’s plan to pursue
a doctorate in a field that had no relation to the position’s job description. See ROI
at 351. The Supervisor noted that the candidate ended up withdrawing his
application because his doctoral program would have interfered with his ability to
perform the job. See ROI at 352. The Supervisor asserted that she often asks
questions when reviewing any hiring package that is submitted. See ROI at 352.

The Supervisor explained that travel is approved for employees based on a number
of factors, including trip necessity, appropriateness for the individual based on the
employee’s position, cost and time to make the trip, the number of trips taken to a
given location, attendance by other team members, and the number of trips taken
overall. See ROI at 354. She asserted that every travel request is considered
individually and she has denied or modified other employees’ travel requests
according to the above factors. See ROI at 354.
                                          4                              2025003498

The Supervisor explained that Complainant did not follow the proper procedure on
documenting and calculating her travel comp time request so she asked her assistant
to help Complainant to follow the correct process and then she approved the request
as soon as it was corrected. See ROI at 358.

The HR Division Chief stated that Complainant contacted HR with a concern about
working in a hostile work environment although she noted that Complainant did not
mention a protected basis or she would have referred Complainant to the Civil Rights
office. See ROI at 369-70. She asserted that Complainant did not like how the
Supervisor was managing her and the program office and disagreed with the
Supervisor’s decisions, which led to Complainant’s concern about being treated
unfairly. See ROI at 369. Several of Complainant’s peers, other Regional
Administrators, confirmed that the Supervisor has also scrutinized their travel
requests and denied it on occasion and that they do not believe the Supervisor has
treated Complainant differently. See ROI at 374-76; 394-97; 413-16; 420. One of
Complainant’s peers (Co-worker 1) explained that the Supervisor is very detail-
oriented and frequently asks follow-up questions for more information. See ROI at
374. Another of Complainant’s peers (Co-worker 2) agreed that the Supervisor
subjects them to micro-management but stated that the Supervisor “seems to do it to
most of us.” See ROI at 397.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge, or a final
decision from the agency. When Complainant requested a final Agency decision,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision
concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected her to
discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

On appeal, Complainant, among other things, argues that the investigation was
inadequate because it did not interview other Hispanic witnesses who might have
corroborated her claims and also asserts that the other witnesses may not have been
candid in their statements. She reiterates that she believes that the Supervisor has
subjected her to disparate treatment and harassment.

The Agency, in pertinent part, argued that its final decision should be affirmed.
                                         5                              2025003498

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the
Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at 9-16 (Aug. 5,
2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the Commission
examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and
testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

We will first briefly address Complainant’s argument that the investigation was
inadequate. Investigations of discrimination complaints are governed by 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108 and the instructions contained in the Commission's EEO MD-110. See
EEO MD-110, Chap. 6 (“Development of Impartial and Appropriate Factual
Records”). An adequate agency investigation is one that is developed impartially
and contains an appropriate factual record. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b). “An appropriate
factual record is one that allows a reasonable fact finder to draw conclusions as to
whether discrimination occurred.” 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(b); EEO MD-110, Chap. 6,
§ § I, IV.B., IV.C. An investigator must be unbiased, objective and thorough. Id. at
§ V.C. The investigator must obtain all relevant evidence from all sources regardless
of how it may affect the outcome. Id. at § V.D.

Complainant’s primary challenge to the adequacy of the investigation is based on an
argument that the investigator did not interview all of her suggested witnesses, who
she asserts would have corroborated her assertion that the Supervisor has a history
of treating Hispanic employees unfairly. The record includes a memorandum from
the investigator noting that Complainant had listed 13 potential witnesses and the
investigator had interviewed 10 of them but did not interview the other three as the
testimony would have been redundant. See ROI at 549. We reject Complainant’s
argument. We note that aside from Complainant’s assertion, there is nothing in the
record to indicate that the other witnesses who were not interviewed would, in fact,
have provided corroborating evidence as the other witnesses who were interviewed
largely did not support Complainant’s assertions. We find that the Agency’s
investigation was sufficient to allow us to determine whether discrimination had
occurred and there is no indication that any of Complainant’s other suggested
witnesses would have provided additional relevant information. See Luigi B. v.
Dep’t of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 2022000793 (March 13, 2023).
                                           6                              2025003498

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). A complainant must initially establish a prima facie
case by demonstrating that she was subjected to an adverse employment action under
circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr.
Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary
depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. at 802
n.13.    The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine,
450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail, a complainant must prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the agency’s explanation is a pretext for
discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143
(2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

As an initial matter, we note that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case
of reprisal. Complainant herself stated that her prior protected activity was
contacting HR with concerns about the Supervisor’s management but she admitted
that she did not mention any protected basis in that meeting with HR and therefore,
the complaint to HR about her supervisor does not constitute protected activity for
purposes of an EEO reprisal claim. See Complainant v. Social Sec’y Admin., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120122018 (Dec. 5, 2013) (finding that expressing opposition to a
supervisor’s decisions did not constitute protected activity because it did not concern
any of the laws enforced by the Commission).

However, we find that even if Complainant had established a prima facie case, the
Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions and
Complainant did not establish that the Agency’s reasons were a pretext for
discrimination. The Supervisor explained that she reviews every travel request
individually and approves or denies the requests based on numerous factors
including trip necessity, appropriateness for the individual based on the employee’s
position, cost and time to make the trip, the number of trips taken to a given location,
attendance by other team members, and the number of trips taken overall. See ROI
at 354. While it is clear that Complainant disagrees with the Supervisor’s decisions,
mere disagreement with the Agency's reasons is not sufficient to establish pretext.
See Juanita K. v. Dep't of Veterans Affs., EEOC Appeal No. 2021002594 (July 26,
2022). Moreover, to the extent Complainant alleges that the witnesses were not
being candid in their statements and therefore should not be trusted, we note that
Complainant did not request a hearing.
                                         7                              2025003498

Consequently, we do not have the benefit of an EEOC Administrative Judge’s
credibility determinations after a hearing and can only evaluate the facts based on
the weight of the evidence presented to us. There is simply no evidence in the record
to support Complainant’s assertions of discriminatory animus. The Commission has
repeatedly stated that mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is
a pretext for intentional discrimination is insufficient because subjective belief,
however genuine, does not constitute evidence of pretext. See Jed T. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Sec’y, EEOC Appeal No. 2022000805 (May 18, 2023); Juliet B. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019); Richardson v. Dep’t of
Agric., EEOC Petition No. 03A40016 (Dec. 11, 2003).

We further find that the evidence in the record does not establish that Complainant
was subjected to unlawful harassment as alleged. At best, all the alleged incidents
of harassment appear to be disagreements with the Supervisor’s managerial style and
decisions, which do not rise to the level of unlawful harassment. We emphasize that
one of Complainant’s peers stated that the Supervisor was detail-oriented and
therefore frequently asked follow-up questions and another of Complainant’s peers
asserted that the Supervisor seemed to micromanage everyone. Without evidence
of an unlawful motive, the Commission has held that personality conflicts,
workplace disputes with a co-worker or disagreements with managerial decisions
generally do not amount to unlawful harassment. See Complainant v. Dep’t of Def.,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120122676 (Dec. 18, 2014) (The record established that the
issues between the complainant and the supervisor were because of personality
conflicts and fundamental disagreements over how work should be done and how
employees should be supervised, and there is no indication that the supervisor was
motivated by discriminatory animus towards the complainant’s race, sex. or age);
see also Carver v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01980522 (Feb. 18, 2000)
(A supervisor questioning an employee with respect to their duties, even if done in
a confrontational manner, is a “common workplace occurrence” and generally does
not constitute harassment).

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.
                                           8                               2025003498

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           9                              2025003498

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:

_________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector

August 24, 2026
Date
