                                         2                             2023003566


                               ISSUE PRESENTED

Whether Complainant’s request for reconsideration of EEOC Appeal No.
2020003348 meets the criteria detailed in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

                                 BACKGROUND

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Paralegal, GS-11, at the Agency’s Detroit, Michigan Field Office.

On July 20, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected her to harassment (hostile work environment) on the basis of disability
(neck disability and arthritis) when:

   1. In March/April 2018, the Acting Disability Program Manager (ADPM)
      refused to engage in the interactive process with Complainant. Specifically,
      Complainant alleged that ADPM started communicating only with
      Complainant’s supervisor about Complainant’s reasonable accommodation
      request;

   2. In May 2018, ADPM disclosed Complainant’s private medical information to
      other Agency officials; and

   3. In May 2018, ADPM refused to provide Complainant with an adequate
      ergonomic chair which would not aggravate Complainant’s impairment.
      Specifically, Complainant alleged that, in lieu of immediately addressing
      Complainant’s complaint about the ergonomic chair, ADPM informed
      Complainant that she would re-evaluate the ergonomic chair concern in six
      months.

Following an investigation, Complainant requested a hearing on her complaint
before a contract Administrative Judge (AJ). The AJ held a hearing on December 3
and 18, 2019, and issued a decision on February 10, 2020.

The AJ’s decision noted that on November 3, 2019, she had issued a Ruling of Partial
Summary Judgment, which she was incorporating with her decision. Although the
AJ found that the allegation in claim 1 was not supported by the facts, the AJ found
                                           3                              2023003566

that there were genuine issues of material fact with respect to claims 2 and 3
regarding (a) the content of the emails in which the ADPM allegedly disclosed
Complainant’s medical information and (b) whether the Agency’s response to
Complainant’s accommodation request, including the effectiveness of the
accommodation provided to Complainant, could constitute pervasive harassment.

In addition, the AJ noted that Complainant alleged retaliation for the first time during
the pre-hearing conference held on November 22, 2019. The AJ ruled that
Complainant could raise a basis at any time, and that Complainant could pursue the
retaliation basis through her own testimony. The AJ noted that she “conducted a
hearing regarding events 2 and 3 and including the basis of retaliation.”

The AJ found that Complainant did not establish that the Agency subjected her to
discriminatory harassment. With respect to the alleged unlawful medical disclosure,
the AJ found that ADPM’s emails were part of the process of evaluating
Complainant’s request for a reasonable accommodation. Specifically, the AJ
determined that ADPM described communication problems with Complainant and
asked for assistance in addressing the accommodation request. The AJ further found
that there was no disclosure of Complainant’s protected medical information, and
that there was no per se violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

The AJ highlighted Complainant’s belief that the Agency’s failure to provide her
with an effective accommodation in a timely manner was part of an ongoing pattern
to harass her, but found that, while the process to obtain a chair with an effective
headrest took a long time, the Agency did not refuse or unnecessarily delay the
provision of the accommodation and thus did not harass Complainant.

The AJ also found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case of retaliation
because she was not subjected to an adverse action. The AJ stated that, while
Complainant alleged the Agency engaged in a “strategy” to discipline her,
Complainant did not prove that ADPM lied about Complainant’s conduct. The AJ
also found that an email by Disability Program Manager 2 (DPM2) in which DPM2
described Complainant’s behavior as “abrasive” did not persuade her that DPM2
intended to have Complainant disciplined. The AJ determined that the evidence did
not show that the Agency intended to retaliate against Complainant due to her
participation in the reasonable accommodation process.
                                          4                              2023003566

Ultimately, the AJ concluded that incident 1 did not occur as alleged, the evidence
did not support a finding of discrimination for incidents 2 or 3, and the Agency did
not retaliate against Complainant because she engaged in the reasonable
accommodation process. The Agency subsequently issued a final order fully
implementing the AJ’s findings that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency
subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant appealed the Agency’s final
order to the Commission.

In our prior decision, we noted that Complainant did not contest the AJ’s decision
regarding incident 1 and did not provide any arguments regarding her allegation that
the Detroit Field Director (FD) retaliated against her for engaging in the reasonable
accommodation process. Thus, we noted that our decision would not address those
claims.

The prior decision found that incident 2 stated a claim for unlawful disclosure of
medical information and incident 3 stated a claim for failure to accommodate, each
independent of the harassment framework. Thus, we analyzed incidents 2 and 3 in
the context of discrete claims alleging violations of the Rehabilitation Act.

In our prior decision, we found that the new incidents of retaliation Complainant
raised at the hearing were similar or related to the claim for failure to accommodate.
Specifically, we noted Complainant testified that her retaliation claim was that: (1)
DPM2 emailed her supervisors and made false statements; (2) ADPM spread false
rumors about Complainant regarding their May 2018 telephone call; and (3) FD tried
to silence Complainant into not speaking about her reasonable accommodation. We
found under the circumstances of the case, it was appropriate to include the new
incidents of retaliation in the complaint, and we noted that our decision would
address Complainant’s allegations that she was subjected to harassment by ADPM
and DPM2 in retaliation for seeking an accommodation of her disability.3

Regarding her reasonable accommodation claim, we assumed Complainant was a
qualified individual with a disability. We found substantial evidence supported the
AJ’s finding that the Agency did not fail to accommodate Complainant.

3
  As mentioned earlier, the prior decision noted Complainant did not provide any
arguments regarding her allegation that FD retaliated against her for engaging in the
reasonable accommodation process, so that incident was not addressed in the
appellate decision.
                                         5                              2023003566

Specifically, we noted Complainant did not establish that ADPM failed to engage in
the interactive process. We acknowledged Complainant’s argument that the Agency
failed to accommodate her because it took almost one year (from May 2018 to April
2019) to provide an effective chair. We found ADPM worked with Complainant’s
Representative (CR) and the vendor to try to fix her chair from May through
September 2018. We found it reasonable for the Agency to attempt to fix or replace
the headrest, which CR had described as defective, prior to exploring the option of
buying a new chair. We noted the multiple actions DPM2 took once she began in
her position with the Agency in the second week of September 2018 through the end
of November 2018. We noted the vendor was largely responsible for any delay after
November 2018 and that DPM2 was unaware of the vendor’s failure to contact
Complainant until March 5, 2019. We noted DPM2 immediately contacted the
vendor when Complainant informed her that she had not heard from the vendor. We
noted a government shutdown from December 22, 2018, through January 25, 2019,
also contributed to the delay. We found the Agency did not cause an unnecessary
delay in providing Complainant with an ergonomic chair to reasonably
accommodate her disability. We determined Complainant did not establish that the
Agency failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation.

Our decision also found that substantial evidence supported the AJ’s determination
that ADPM did not disclose Complainant’s medical information in violation of the
Rehabilitation Act.

Regarding Complainant’s claim of harassment based on disability, we noted our
finding that Complainant did not establish disability discrimination for claim 2 and
claim 3 precluded Complainant’s claim of harassment based on disability.
Furthermore, we found Complainant did not establish that the Agency subjected her
to harassment based on retaliation regarding claims 2 and 3. Specifically, we noted
there was insufficient evidence of retaliatory motivation arising from those claims.

However, we noted the AJ erred when she determined that Complainant did not
establish a prima facie case of retaliation because she was not subject to an adverse
action. We found the Agency subjected Complainant to unlawful retaliatory
harassment when ADPM copied higher-level Agency officials on her emails sent on
May 11 and May 17, 2018, to report misconduct by Complainant. On May 11, 2018,
ADPM sent an email to various Agency officials, including the FD, regarding the
“rather disturbing interactive process meeting” she had with Complainant. Hearing
Exhibit 48. ADPM stated that she was trying to ascertain Complainant’s issues with
                                         6                              2023003566

her chair when Complainant began to “yell, scream, [and] accuse [ADPM] of
disrespecting” Complainant. Id. ADPM stated that she insisted that this type of
exchange never happen again. Id. On May 17, 2018, ADPM sent Complainant an
email, and copied various Agency officials. Hearing Exhibit 3. ADPM stated that
she attempted to communicate with Complainant on May 11, 2018, and that
Complainant “yelled, screamed, and became belligerent.” Id.

We found ADPM included as recipients to these emails Agency officials who were
not in Complainant’s chain of command and therefore had no role in addressing any
alleged misconduct issues with Complainant. Even crediting ADPM’s assertion that
Complainant engaged in misconduct, we found that informing high-level Agency
officials who had no reason to know of the alleged misconduct would be sufficient
to dissuade a reasonable employee from engaging in protected EEO activity.

Regarding DPM2’s email sent on March 25, 2019, requesting assistance with
receiving a “less negative attitude, abrasive/curt responses (verbal and in writing)”
from Complainant, we found that DPM2 was requesting assistance, not reporting
any alleged misconduct. Hearing Exhibit 17. We noted that even if DPM2 was
reporting alleged misconduct, she included only S1 and S2 on the email, who would
have been the appropriate management officials. Thus, we found that DPM2’s email
did not constitute retaliatory harassment.

                         CONTENTIONS ON REQUEST

On reconsideration, Complainant contends that the Commission’s prior decision
failed to review the evidence referenced in her appeal brief. As support for her
assertion, Complainant cites footnote 4 in our previous decision in which we said
Complainant did not provide any evidence with her appeal, and that even if she had,
new evidence generally would not be considered. Complainant notes that she cited
several pieces of evidence in her appeal brief that were already part of the record.
She states that all the documents cited in her appeal brief were already part of the
record. Complainant also states the appellate record was incomplete. She states that
several motions and accompanying exhibits filed with the AJ were not included in
the appellate record. The only specific pleading Complainant mentions as missing
was the motion for summary judgment. She also states in general that the record is
missing several exhibits that were previously provided with motions and responses
to motions.
                                          7                              2023003566

Furthermore, Complainant contends that the prior decision erred in finding that the
Agency did not fail to provide an effective reasonable accommodation or disclose
medical information in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. She reiterates her
arguments that the Agency refused to engage in the interactive process regarding her
request for an effective chair.

Finally, Complainant states the Commission erred in determining she was retaliated
against only because Headquarters employees were included on the email. She
contends the Agency implemented a strategy to discipline her because she continued
to request an effective accommodation, which she states was an adverse action that
would deter her from engaging in protected activity. She notes she and her
supervisor testified that the conduct ADPM alleged she engaged in did not occur.

In response to Complainant’s request, the Agency argues the Commission’s prior
decision properly found no disability discrimination or harassment based on
disability or retaliation for claims 2 and 3. The Agency noted that the prior decision
reversed its determination of no violation of the Rehabilitation Act’s prohibition
against retaliation.

Regarding Complainant’s contention that the hearing record was incomplete, the
Agency states that assertion is false. The Agency notes that the case file included
relevant pleadings and that additional evidence was included on the Commission’s
portal.

The Agency also argues that the decision correctly concluded the Agency engaged
in the interactive process with Complainant, that the prior decision properly
concluded that it did not cause an unnecessary delay in providing Complainant a
reasonable accommodation, and that the prior decision correctly determined that
Complainant was effectively accommodated and not harassed.

                            STANDARD OF REVIEW

EEOC regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a request
to reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a), where the requesting party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law; or (2)
the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or
operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).
                                          8                              2023003566


                                    ANALYSIS

We find that our prior decision was not clearly erroneous in its analysis of
Complainant’s complaint. At the outset, we note that neither party contests our prior
finding that the Agency subjected Complainant to retaliatory harassment on May 11
and May 17, 2018, when ADPM copied high-level Agency officials, who were not
in Complainant’s chain of command, on emails reporting Complainant’s alleged
misconduct.

Our prior decision concluded that Complainant did not establish that ADPM failed
to engage in the interactive process as alleged. We found Complainant did not
establish that the Agency failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation or
that the Agency caused an unnecessary delay in providing her with the reasonable
accommodation of an ergonomic chair. In addition, we found no improper
disclosure of Complainant’s medical information. We further found Complainant
failed to establish that she was subjected to harassment based on her disability or in
retaliation for engaging in EEO-protected activity (here, requesting a disability
accommodation) as to claims 2 and 3. Additionally, we found DPM2’s email sent
on March 25, 2019, did not constitute retaliatory harassment.

Regarding Complainant’s contentions on reconsideration, we find that Complainant
provides no evidence to warrant granting her request. In her request, Complainant
claims the Commission failed to consider the evidence she submitted in her prior
appellate brief, and she cites footnote 4 in our prior decision in support of her
argument. However, footnote 4 in our prior decision correctly articulated the
Commission’s standard for considering new evidence submitted for the first time on
appeal and noted that Complainant submitted no new evidence with her appeal. A
review of the prior appellate brief confirms the evidence to which Complainant’s
brief cited was already part of the record and, thus, not new evidence submitted on
appeal. Additionally, we note that in the instant request, Complainant acknowledges
that all the documents cited in her appeal brief were already part of the record. Upon
review, we find that our prior decision properly considered the arguments made
when Complainant submitted her appellate brief. Aside from her general assertion
that the prior decision failed to consider the evidence submitted on appeal,
Complainant does not identify any specific evidence the Commission allegedly
failed to consider or explain how its consideration would have altered the outcome.
                                          9                              2023003566

Complainant also states the appellate record was incomplete. She states that several
motions and accompanying exhibits filed with the AJ were not included in the
appellate record. However, the only specific pleading Complainant mentioned as
missing was the motion for summary judgment. The AJ granted summary judgment
on claim 1 and incorporated that into her February 10, 2020 decision. In her
underlying appeal, Complainant did not challenge the AJ’s decision regarding claim
1 or any other matter addressed in the AJ’s summary judgment decision; thus, we
note there is no need to review the propriety of the AJ’s ruling on summary
judgment. Regarding Complainant’s general assertion in her request that the record
is missing several exhibits that were previously provided with motions and responses
to motions, we note she fails to identify any specific exhibits or responses to motions
which would have resulted in a different outcome in our prior decision.

In her request for reconsideration, Complainant largely expresses disagreement with
the Agency’s engagement in the interactive process and its role in the delay in
providing an effective accommodation. However, these arguments were previously
raised and fully considered on appeal, and Complainant has not presented evidence
that our prior decision was clearly erroneous.

Complainant also claims that the previous decision erred in finding no unlawful
disclosure of medical information in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. But aside
from this bare assertion, she provides no specific argument or supporting evidence
to justify this conclusion. Accordingly, Complainant has not shown that our prior
determination that ADPM did not unlawfully disclose her medical information was
clearly erroneous.

Additionally, Complainant asserts that we should expand our finding that she was
subjected to retaliation when high-level employees were included on ADPM’s
emails. Specifically, Complainant contends that the Agency implemented a strategy
to discipline her because she continued to request an effective accommodation and
argues that this was an adverse action that would deter her from engaging in
protected activity. She notes that both she and her supervisor testified that she did
not engage in the conduct alleged by ADPM, and argues that ADPM lied about her
conduct to initiate discipline in response to her request for an effective
accommodation. In our prior decision, we noted that the AJ considered this claim
and found that Complainant did not prove ADPM misrepresented her conduct or that
the evidence showed that the Agency intended to retaliate against her for
participating in the reasonable accommodation process. Our prior decision also
                                         10                             2023003566

considered Complainant’s version of events as well as her testimony and the
testimony of her supervisor that he overheard Complainant’s end of the May 11,
2018 conversation and that he heard Complainant ask ADPM not to raise her voice.
In her request, Complainant’s argument mainly expresses disagreement as to the
veracity of ADPM’s characterization of her conduct, but fails to supply evidence
that the record so contradicts ADPM’s account of her behavior that our prior decision
was clearly erroneous. We find that substantial evidence supports the AJ’s finding
of no discrimination regarding ADPM’s emails.

The Commission emphasizes that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal
to the Commission. See Equal Employment Opportunity Mgmt. Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110) (Aug. 5, 2015), at 9–18; see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep’t
of Agric., EEOC Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20, 2007). Rather, a
reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency.
Complainant has not done so here.

We therefore determine that there is no basis to disturb the Commission’s prior
decision. However, as discussed below, we modify the ordered relief to ensure it
remains capable of implementation. The Order from the prior decision is restated as
modified. 4

                                  CONCLUSION

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds
that the request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the
decision of the Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No.
2020003348 remains the Commission’s decision, as modified herein. There is no
further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on this
request.




4
 The prior decision inadvertently did not include the Posting Notice. That Posting
Notice is included in this decision.
                                          11                              2023003566

                                       ORDER

The Commission does not find that the corrective actions ordered in the prior
decision were improper or inadequate at the time they were issued. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a) (requiring that appellate decisions include appropriate remedies and
relief). However, in issuing this decision on reconsideration, the Commission must
ensure that its ordered relief remains capable of implementation, as compliance with
“[r]elief ordered in a final Commission decision is mandatory and . . . [f]ailure to
implement the ordered relief shall be subject to judicial enforcement . . . .” 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.502(a). Based on current circumstances, including the restructuring of the
unit responsible for processing reasonable accommodation requests, the prior
decision’s individual-specific corrective measures are no longer practicable.
Accordingly, the Commission modifies the ordered relief solely to ensure
meaningful and enforceable compliance, without disturbing the underlying findings
or the appropriateness of the original remedial framework.

The Agency shall take the following actions:

   1. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      complete a supplemental investigation concerning Complainant’s entitlement
      to compensatory damages and determine the amount of compensatory
      damages due to Complainant in a final decision with appeal rights to the
      Commission. The Agency shall pay this amount to Complainant within 30
      calendar days of the date of the determination of the amount of compensatory
      damages. If there is a dispute regarding the exact amount of compensatory
      damages, the Agency shall issue a check to Complainant for the undisputed
      amount. Complainant may petition for enforcement or clarification of the
      amount in dispute. The petition for clarification or enforcement must be filed
      with the Compliance Officer, at the address referenced in the statement
      entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.”

   2. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      provide the ADPM and all employees in the Workforce Engagement &
      Accommodation Resources (WEAR) Division of the Office of Civil Rights
      responsible for the administration of the reasonable accommodation process
      under EEO laws with a minimum of four hours of required in-person
      interactive training, which shall be conducted at the Office of Civil Rights
      headquarters. Employees not assigned to that location may attend from
                                        12                             2023003566

      another Agency worksite. This in-person requirement shall not apply to any
      employee with a related Agency-approved reasonable accommodation. Such
      training shall address the responsibilities of these employees regarding the
      prevention of workplace discrimination and reprisal, including training on
      related EEO laws. If ADPM has left the Agency’s employ, the Agency shall
      furnish documentation of ADPM’s departure date.

   3. Within 90 calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency shall
      (a) review matters since the issuance date of the Commission’s decision in
      EEOC Appeal No. 2020003348 in which there has been a finding of
      discrimination or reprisal to ensure compliance with the appropriate table of
      penalties, if applicable, and any other relevant policy governing disciplinary
      action; and (b) determine whether disciplinary action is warranted based on
      the nature of the conduct at issue and applicable Agency policy. The
      Commission does not consider training to be a disciplinary action. The
      Agency shall report to the Commission its determination as to whether
      disciplinary action was warranted, specify any action taken, and, if no action
      was taken or if no action could be taken, set forth the reasons for that
      determination.

   4. The Agency shall post a notice in accordance with the paragraph entitled,
      “Posting Order.”

The Agency is further directed to submit a report of compliance, as provided in the
statement entitled “Implementation of the Commission’s Decision.” The report shall
include supporting documentation verifying that the corrective action has been
implemented.

                           POSTING ORDER (G0617)


The Agency is ordered to post at its Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer in
Washington, D.C., copies of the attached notice. Copies of the notice, after being
signed by the Agency's duly authorized representative, shall be posted both in hard
copy and electronic format by the Agency within 30 calendar days of the date this
decision was issued and shall remain posted for 60 consecutive days in conspicuous
places, including all places where notices to employees are customarily posted. The
Agency shall take reasonable steps to ensure that said notices are not altered,
                                         13                             2023003566

defaced, or covered by any other material. The original signed notice is to be
submitted to the Compliance Officer as directed in the paragraph entitled,
“Implementation of the Commission’s Decision,” within 10 calendar days of the
expiration of the posting period. The report must be in digital format and must be
submitted via the Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.403(g).

                          ATTORNEY’S FEES (H0124)

If Complainant has been represented by an attorney (as defined by 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.501(e)(1)(iii)), they are entitled to an award of reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred in the processing of the complaint. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501(e). The award
of attorney’s fees shall be paid by the Agency. The attorney shall submit a verified
statement of fees to the Agency—not to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Office of Federal Operations—within thirty (30) calendar days of
receipt of this decision. The Agency shall then process the claim for attorney’s fees
in accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.501.

     IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)


Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and § 1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s
corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of
each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO
Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital format required by the
Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under which compliance
was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via
FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). The Agency’s final report must contain supporting
documentation when previously not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of
all submissions to the Complainant and his/her representative.


If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may
petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with
the Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for
enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
                                          14                              2023003566


Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying
complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled, “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C.
2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders
set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this
matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for
enforcement by that agency.

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (Q0124)

This decision affirms the Agency’s final decision/action, in part, but it also requires
the Agency to continue its administrative processing of a portion of your
complaint. You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision on both that portion of your complaint which the Commission has affirmed
and that portion of the complaint which has been remanded for continued
administrative processing. In the alternative, you may file a civil action after one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the date you filed your complaint with
the Agency, or filed your appeal with the Commission. If you file a civil action, you
must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency
head or department head, identifying that person by his or her full name and official
title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility, or
department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request that the court appoint an attorney for you.
                                           15                           2023003566

You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:
RAYMOND        Digitally signed by
               RAYMOND WINDMILLER

WINDMILLER Date:     2026.05.05 07:01:35
______________________________
               -04'00'

Raymond Windmiller
Executive Officer
Executive Secretariat


May 5, 2026
Date
