                                         2                              2026000097

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an
Administrative Support Assistant at the Agency’s VA Medical Center in Orlando,
Florida. Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her on the bases of race (black), national origin (Hispanic),
disability (physical), and reprisal for protected EEO activity when she was subjected
to discriminatory harassment including but not limited to micromanaging, a
coworker cursing her out, denying her reasonable accommodation request, and an
unfavorable performance rating which ultimately resulted in Complainant feeling
forced to resign.

After completion of the investigation, Complainant requested a final Agency
decision, so the Agency issued a final decision on April 4, 2024, concluding that
Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to discrimination as alleged.2

Complainant appealed and on appeal, in a decision dated September 22, 2025, the
Commission affirmed the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

Complainant filed the instant request for reconsideration, arguing that the appellate
decision erred and reiterating that she was subjected to discrimination and
harassment. We reject Complainant’s arguments in her request for reconsideration
as they amount to nothing more than reiterating her previous arguments on appeal.
We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the
Commission. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9, § VILA (Aug. 5, 2015). Rather, a
reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision
involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency.
Complainant has not done so here. While Complainant insists that she did submit a
reasonable accommodation request, she did not provide any evidence in the record
to support her assertions. While it is clear that Complainant believes that she was
treated unfairly, there is simply no evidence in the record beyond her own assertions
to support her belief of discriminatory or retaliatory animus. The Commission has
repeatedly stated that mere assertions or conjecture that an agency’s explanation is

2
  The Agency’s decision further informed Complainant that her constructive
discharge claim alone was appealable to the Merit Systems Protection Board, not the
Commission. Complainant’s constructive discharge claim was therefore not
addressed on appeal.
                                           3                              2026000097

a pretext for intentional discrimination are insufficient because subjective belief,
however genuine, does not constitute evidence of any unlawful motive. See Leif S.
v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 2021004037 (Apr. 28, 2022); Juliet B.
v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019).

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission finds
that the request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c), and it is the
decision of the Commission to deny the request. The decision in EEOC Appeal No.
2024003490 remains the Commission's decision. There is no further right of
administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on this request.

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0124)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of
administrative appeal from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to file a
civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90)
calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file a civil action,
you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person who is the official
Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their full name and
official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court.
“Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         4                              2026000097

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


February 12, 2026
Date
