                                      2                          2025000633

Following a supplemental investigation, the Agency issued a final decision
awarding Complainant $30,000.000 in non-pecuniary compensatory
damages. On appeal, Complainant contends that the award was inadequate
and requests that the award be increased to $178,825.00.

                         ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, §
VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and
relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the
Commission's own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

As an initial matter, we note that Complainant has not raised any challenges
regarding pecuniary compensatory damages. In view of Complainant's failure
to provide any arguments on appeal, we agree with the Agency that
Complainant has not established entitlement to pecuniary damages.

Non-pecuniary compensatory damages cover losses that are not subject to
precise quantification, i.e., emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, mental
anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to
character and reputation, injury to credit standing, and loss of health. See
Compensatory and Punitive Damages Available Under Section 102 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991, EEOC Notice No. 915.302 at 10 (July 14, 1992). There are
no specific guidelines for determining the amount of damages for non-
pecuniary losses except that the award should reflect the nature and severity
of the harm and the duration or expected duration of the harm. See Loving v.
Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29, 1997). The
Commission notes that non-pecuniary compensatory damages are designed
to remedy the harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than punish
the Agency for the discriminatory action.

Furthermore, compensatory damages should not be motivated by passion or
prejudice or “monstrously excessive” standing alone but should be consistent
with the amounts awarded in similar cases. See Ward-Jenkins v. Dep't of the
Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 01961483 (Mar. 4, 1999).
                                      3                          2025000633

Upon review of the evidence, we find that Complainant attributes a majority
of her harm to events not at issue in the above-captioned complaint. Based
on the evidence in the record, (i.e., Complainant’s testimony, her witness
statements, and her medical evidence), we find that Complainant began
experiencing anxiety and depression as early as November 2017. Further,
Complainant admits she first experienced harm “on or about February 20,
2018,” and that her harm was exacerbated when she filed a workers’
compensation claim in July 2018 and was out of work for approximately one
year. Complainant’s husband, also attributed Complainant’s harm to a host of
factors unrelated to her non-selections, including being denied a reasonable
accommodation, being out on workers’ compensation, and being subjected to
“unwarranted criticism, sabotage, and harassment.” Even Complainant’s
psychiatrist stated that Complainant’s conditions were caused by “the work
environment and conditions. The diagnosis of all the incongruence with
defamation and persecutory issues that augmented in her workplace as
related to her efforts to advocate for herself regarding employment
conditions” and escalated in May 2018.

The record contains some evidence that Complainant experienced harm due
to her non-selections. She testified that her non-selections damaged the self-
esteem and self-worth she placed on her career. Complainant’s witnesses also
cited the non-selections as one of the factors contributing to Complainant’s
harm. However, Complainant does not present sufficient evidence delineating
the harm from her non-selections from the harm caused by other factors
unrelated to this case. Further, although Complainant began seeing a
psychiatrist in September 2018, and was prescribed medications at that time,
there is no evidence as to whether this occurred before or after her September
28, 2018 non-selection. Similarly, Complainant does not explain when her
alleged elevated blood pressure, “Irritable Bowel Syndrome symptomology,”
or nausea began, how often it occurred, or provide any medical documents to
support her contention.

We agree with the Agency that this matter is similar to Israel F. v. Dep’t of
the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2024001719 (Aug. 6, 2024). In Israel F., the
complainant sought compensatory damages related to issues pertaining to a
promotion, as well as being charged absent without leave. However, the
complainant attributed much of his harm to other factors that began a year
prior to the issues in his case and included financial distress.
                                       4                           2025000633

The Commission in Israel F. affirmed the award of $25,000.00 in non-
pecuniary compensatory damages and held that even though the complainant
had preexisting conditions, the undisputed record established that the
agency’s actions aggravated those conditions. See also Erik S. v. Dep’t. of
Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 2020004617 (Dec. 13, 2021) (Commission awarded
$30,000.00 in non-pecuniary compensatory damages where most of harm
was unrelated to discrimination and preexisting conditions were present).

Accordingly, we find that an award of $30,000.00 is appropriate in this case.
This amount is consistent with amounts awarded in similar cases and is neither
motivated by passion or prejudice nor monstrously excessive. The Agency’s
decision regarding compensatory damages remains in place.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the
party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support
of the request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the
request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar
days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which
to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507.
                                        5                           2025000633

In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider
shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five days of the
expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests.
                                       6                           2025000633

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:



________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


February 17, 2026
Date
