                                         2                             2025001923

subjected to a hostile work environment when he was, among other things, denied a
request to participate in a non-Agency event (a University study) because it could
be considered “political activity;” his Supervisor accused him of being rude,
inappropriate, and disrespectful; on November 28, 2023, his Supervisor rated
Complainant as “Fully Successful” rather than “Outstanding” in his mid-term
probationary performance appraisal; and ultimately, on March 4, 2024, he was
issued a Notice of Termination during Probationary Period, with an effective date of
March 8, 2024.

Complainant began employment as a Remote HR Specialist Trainee on March 26,
2023, subject to a one-year probationary period. See Report of Investigation (ROI)
at 247. He asserted that he was harassed by his Supervisor who also targeted his
family and he stated that he believes it was because of his race and sex because at a
meeting, he made a statement about how as a black male, it is easy to get a job as a
teacher and the Supervisor “made some type of facial expression.” See ROI at 249.
He stated that a former professor offered to help another professor at the University
of Minnesota who was conducting a study on how returning citizens could
participate in democracy and because of his experience in the criminal justice
system, he asked the Supervisor if he could participate and she flatly refused and
said it would be a violation of the Hatch Act. See ROI at 251. He also asserted that
the Supervisor falsely accused him of being rude, inappropriate, and disrespectful
and that the Supervisor always “misconstrue[d] [his] words and [said] that [he] said
something that [he] never said.” See ROI at 252.

Complainant stated that he believed he should have received an “Outstanding” in his
mid-term performance appraisal and that the Supervisor promoted people who were
coming to him for help with tests. See ROI at 254. He insisted that he was not given
any sort of warning during his probationary period that he might be terminated, and
he believed that the Supervisor had “some type of vendetta” against him. See ROI
at 260-61. However, the record contains an email which Complainant sent to his
second-level supervisor, the Regional Preceptor, on October 17, 2023, in which
Complainant voluntarily stated that he wanted to express his “great appreciation” for
his Supervisor for her “exceptional work” as a mentor, asserting that he could not
have asked for a better Supervisor, that she encouraged him to put his best self
forward and always took the time to listen and provide individual feedback to her
trainees. See ROI at 303-304.
                                          3                             2025001923

The Supervisor stated that she did not refuse his request to participate in the
University study, she only told him to reach out to the Office of General Counsel
(OGC) to ensure his participation would not be in violation of anything and
afterwards, he emailed her to let her know that OGC had told him it would be fine.
See ROI at 272. She asserted that Complainant’s behavior became increasingly
disrespectful and accusatory, such as when, for example, he responded to a sample
manager by saying, “I am advising you that if you ‘do not have time’ to dig up the
rest of the emails,” or that he responded to an email she had sent him by saying, “I
know you do not want to take extra time to review.” See ROI at 273. She stated
that during the rating period for the mid-term performance appraisal, Complainant
had failed two post-tests and there were other performance concerns that did not
allow for him to receive an “Outstanding.” See ROI at 274. She asserted that as
Complainant’s supervisor, she submitted the request for probationary removal along
with evidence for the request and the termination was then decided by the Executive
Director of the HR Operations Office (Executive Director). See ROI at 276. The
record included numerous contemporaneous emails sent between the Supervisor and
Complainant in which she pointed out performance deficiencies. See ROI at 341-
439.

The Executive Director confirmed that she signed the termination letter for
Complainant due to unacceptable performance, explaining that the Employee and
Labor Relations Manager (Labor Manager) and the Supervisor would have worked
closely together to discuss and review performance issues before drafting the
termination letter. See ROI at 292; 475-76. The Regional Preceptor stated that the
Supervisor reported multiple test failures and late assignments from the Complainant
and that his conduct was “progressively declining” as the Supervisor addressed the
performance issues. See ROI at 299.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before
an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge, or a final
decision from the agency. When Complainant requested a final Agency decision,
the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The
decision concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him
to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.
                                          4                             2025001923

On appeal, Complainant, among other things, insisted that the final Agency decision
erred because the Supervisor lied about his having performance issues and also took
his words out of context to falsely accuse him of being disrespectful, reiterating that
he was subjected to harassment.2 The Agency did not file a brief in response.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the
Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at 9-16 (Aug. 5,
2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the Commission
examine the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements, and
testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties,
and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record
and its interpretation of the law”).

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). A complainant must initially establish a prima facie
case by demonstrating that he was subjected to an adverse employment action under
circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr.
Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary
depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. at 802
n.13.    The burden then shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine,
450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981). To ultimately prevail, a complainant must prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the agency’s explanation is a pretext for
discrimination. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143
(2000); St. Mary’s Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

We find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
terminating Complainant during his probationary period and Complainant did not
establish that the Agency’s reasons are a pretext for discrimination.

2
 To the extent Complainant also alleges that the Supervisor violated his freedom of
speech rights, we note that such alleged violations are not within the Commission’s
jurisdiction. See Marcellus M. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182213
(Aug. 16, 2019) (Commission has no jurisdiction over Constitutional claims).
                                         5                             2025001923

Contrary to Complainant’s assertions, the evidence in the record provides support
for the Supervisor’s statement that Complainant had performance issues through the
numerous contemporaneous email exchanges between the Supervisor and
Complainant in which the Supervisor pointed out mistakes Complainant had made
and late assignments. Moreover, the mere fact that Complainant is a member of his
protected classes does not establish that the Agency’s reasons were discriminatory
and Complainant’s assertion that the Supervisor cautioning him for the tone of the
email he sent out to his coworkers about Juneteenth does not prove racial animus.
The Commission has repeatedly stated that mere assertions or conjecture that an
agency’s explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination is insufficient
because subjective belief, however genuine, does not constitute evidence of pretext.
See Charlie O. v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2021002639 (March 29,
2022); Juliet B. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019).

We further find that the record does not establish that Complainant was subjected to
unlawful harassment. To begin with, the evidence in the record does not support
that many of the alleged incidents of harassment occurred as alleged, for example,
there is no evidence that the Supervisor refused Complainant’s request to participate
in the University study and, indeed, Complainant himself acknowledged and
provided documentation for the fact that he did, in fact, participate in the study.
Moreover, Complainant’s insistence that the Supervisor continuously harassed him
is severely undercut by Complainant’s own email sent after many of the alleged
incidents of harassment occurred in which Complainant praised the Supervisor for
her “exceptional work” and stating that he could not have asked for a better
Supervisor. See ROI at 303-304. In any event, even if Complainant was offended
by some of the Supervisor’s actions, it is well-settled that common workplace
tribulations such as tense interpersonal relationships with a supervisor and routine
work assignments, instructions, and admonishments do not rise to the level of an
unlawful hostile work environment. See Arthur J. v. Social Sec’y Admin., EEOC
Appeal No. 0120142985 (Feb. 28, 2017).

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.
                                           6                              2025001923


                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           7                             2025001923

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).


        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         8                             2025001923

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 31, 2026
Date
