           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                   Jolene M., 1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                  Secretary,
                         Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                   Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2023004209

                      Agency No. 200H-0642-2021105312

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of
employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, we
AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision regarding remedial relief.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a contract Histotechnologist at the Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA
Medical Center (VAMC) in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.




1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2023004209

On December 3, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging the Agency
subjected her to hostile environment harassment (sexual and non-sexual) based on
sex (female) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

1. On June 4, 2021, after her in-person interview, Complainant’s first-level
supervisor (S1), Supervisory Histologist, insisted on walking Complainant to her car
despite her protests to the contrary and then “embraced” (i.e., hugged) her, kissed
her left cheek, and, after she removed her mask, told her that she “looked so pretty”;

2. On July 19, 2021, and throughout her shift, S1 violated Complainant’s personal
space and touched her inappropriately when he caressed her chest and neck with his
open palm;

3. Between approximately August 9 and August 18, 2021, on “numerous occasions,”
S1:

   a. touched and grabbed Complainant’s breast, thigh, head, shoulder, hips, and
      buttocks in a “lewd and lascivious manner” and
   b. told Complainant he was her supervisor and how ”pretty” she was and referred
      to her as “baby” on numerous occasions, after which she suffered panic
      attacks:

4. On August 13, 2021, S1 kissed her on the cheek while making “vulgar” comments,
such as calling her “pretty,” thereby causing Complainant to suffer a panic attack;

5. On August 18, 2021, S1 rubbed Complainant’s thighs without her consent after
she informed him that she needed to leave early due to dizziness as a result of the
continued “sexual harassment”;

6. On or about August 18, 2021, after Complainant’s second-level supervisor (S2),
Laboratory (Lab) Manager, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Services (PLMS),
became aware of Complainant’s allegations involving S1, he instructed her to “talk
things out with [S1],” thereby disregarding her emotional distress, and refused to
remove S1 from the premises, which forced Complainant to take a leave of absence
from work;
                                          3                              2023004209

7. On or about September 24, 2021, Complainant received a response from the
facility’s EEO Manager (EEOM) indicating that Complainant could have returned
to work but chose not to do so; and

8. On or about November 5, 2021, Complainant ceased receiving her salary and
learned that her position was posted, which she believed to mean that she was
terminated from employment.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the Agency. Complainant
requested a final agency decision. On January 27, 2022, the Agency subsequently
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), partially finding in favor
of Complainant.

While the Agency found no persuasive evidence to corroborate Complainant’s
allegations of non-sexual harassment, the Agency ultimately ruled in favor of
Complainant on her allegations of sexual harassment. In its decision, the Agency
determined that Complainant’s first-level supervisor subjected her to sexual
harassment consisting of physical touching, and “vulgar” comments between June
4, 2021, and August 18, 2021, after she repeatedly informed him that his conduct
was unwelcome. As the Agency found that management failed to take prompt and
effective action to address the alleged sexual harassment, the Agency found
sufficient basis to impute liability to the Agency. As to the EEO Manager’s comment
and the cessation of Complainant’s salary, the Agency found no persuasive evidence
of discrimination.

To remedy the finding of discrimination on Complainant’s sexual harassment claim,
the Agency, in relevant part, ordered a supplemental investigation into
Complainant’s entitlement to compensatory damages. As to equitable relief, the
Agency noted that Complainant received compensation and other benefits from her
employer, a government contractor. As such, the Agency determined that it was not
responsible for paying Complainant backpay or other financial compensation,
restoring any leave Complainant took, or providing Complainant with other
equitable relief related to the discrimination found to have occurred.
                                         4                              2023004209

Nevertheless, the Agency still ordered Agency officials to consult with
Complainant’s employer to determine the scope of any equitable relief to which
Complainant may be entitled, including backpay/financial compensation, leave
restoration, and/or other benefits, as applicable, due to the discrimination found to
have occurred so that Complainant may be made whole. Complainant did not appeal
this decision to the Commission.

Complainant subsequently sought the following damages from the Agency: 1)
$19,000.00 in backpay or unemployment benefits; 2) $1,140.00 in co-pay expenses
for therapy sessions; 3) $69.12 for medical prescriptions; 4) $10,872.25 and
$4,652.00 in loans from her sister and mother, respectively; 5) $775.20 in late
payment fees and interest on credit card debt; 6) $100.00 in late payment fees on
student loan debt; and 7) a $240.00 non-refundable entry fee for the
histotechnologist examination that she did not take. In addition, Complainant sought
$225,000.00 in compensatory damages (without distinguishing between pecuniary
and nonpecuniary compensatory damages).

The Agency issued a decision on remedial relief on June 20, 2023, ultimately
awarding Complainant $960.00 in pecuniary compensatory damages and $45,000.00
in nonpecuniary compensatory damages. The Agency, however, declined to award
Complainant the requested $19,000.00 in backpay and unemployment benefits,
citing its prior determination that it was not responsible for paying Complainant
backpay or other financial compensation, restoring any leave Complainant took, or
providing Complainant with other equitable relief related to the discrimination found
to have occurred. The instant appeal followed.

Through her attorney, Complainant initially argues that the Agency failed to comply
with its order to consult with the Contractor to determine the scope of any equitable
relief to which she may be entitled. According to Complainant, the Agency’s failure
to do so deprived her of her right to obtain equitable relief. As for the Agency’s
award of compensatory damages, Complainant argues that she is entitled to
additional compensation. Specifically, Complainant argues that the Agency failed to
properly compensate her for the pecuniary losses that she sustained. Complainant
maintains that these expenses were incurred as a direct consequence of the
discrimination and should have been awarded as past pecuniary compensatory
damages.
                                         5                              2023004209

As a general matter, when discrimination is found, an agency must provide a
complainant with a remedy that constitutes full, make-whole relief to restore the
complainant as nearly as possible to the position she would have occupied absent
the discrimination. See, e.g., Franks v. Bowman Transp. Co., 424 U.S. 747, 764
(1976); Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 418-19 (1975); Alissa U. v.
Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 2022000423 (Aug. 8, 2024), req. for recon.
den. EEOC Request No. 2024004771 (Dec. 10, 2024); Ervin P. v. Dep’t of Def.,
EEOC Appeal No. 2023005253 (June 12, 2024).

Pecuniary losses are out-of-pocket expenses that are incurred because of the
employer’s unlawful action, including moving expenses, medical expenses,
psychiatric expenses, physical therapy expenses, and other quantifiable out-of-
pocket expenses. See Enforcement Guidance: Compensatory and Punitive Damages
Available Under Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act, EEOC NO. 915.002 (July 14,
1992) at 14. For claims seeking pecuniary damages, objective evidence should
include documentation of out-of-pocket expenses for all actual costs and an
explanation of the expense, e.g., medical billings, other costs associated with the
injury caused by the agency’s actions, and an explanation for the expenditure. Id. at
9.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, including the arguments raised on appeal,
we concur with the Agency’s award of $960.00 in past pecuniary compensatory
damages for therapy co-pay expenses because Complainant submitted receipts
substantiating only $960.00 in expenses, rather than the $1,140.00 that she claimed.
We further find that Complainant failed to substantiate her claimed prescription
medication expense as she did not provide any bills, receipts, or other documentary
evidence to support the claimed cost of the medication. In addition, although she
submitted receipts and statements relating to a missed histotechnology examination,
credit card debt, late-payment fees and interest charges, and student loan late fees
and interest, she failed to demonstrate that those expenses were proximately caused
by the Agency’s discriminatory conduct.

Moreover, with respect to the loans Complainant obtained from family members, we
find that Complainant did not provide sufficient documentation identifying the
specific out-of-pocket expenses for which the loan proceeds were used or
demonstrating that those expenses were incurred as a result of the discrimination.
                                         6                              2023004209

Indeed, ordinary household expenses, living expenses and mortgage payments are
not recoverable as pecuniary damages as the expenses would have been incurred
whether Complainant was discriminated against or not and as such, they cannot be
said to be causally related to the Agency’s discriminatory action. Neal O. v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2023000571 (Mar. 15, 2023).

As for Complainant’s entitlement to equitable relief, while Complainant argues that
Agency officials deprived her of her right to recover equitable relief by failing to
consult with her employer, we ultimately find her argument to be unpersuasive. We
note that in its decision the Agency found that it was not responsible for providing
Complainant with equitable relief, and Complainant did not appeal this
determination. Even if the Commission’s Office of Federal Sector (OFS) ordered the
Agency to implement the provision to consult with Complainant’s employer
regarding her entitlement to remedial relief, such an order by OFS would be illusory,
as OFS would have no authority to order Complainant’s employer – a private sector
company – to provide Complainant with remedial relief. To the extent Complainant
believes that her private sector employer discriminated against her, we encourage
her to contact the nearest EEOC field office in a timely manner to learn about the
process for filing a private sector charge of discrimination.

Based on the foregoing, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision which remains in
place.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                        RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:


      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
                                           7                               2023004209

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision.
                                           8                              2023004209

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________               Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 29, 2026
Date
