                                         2                             2025001339

He was originally hired on October 11, 2022, by the Agency’s Office of the Chief
Financial Officer, Budget Division, in Washington, D.C. However, due to conflicts
with his university schedule, Complainant transferred to the Agency’s Financial
Management Division in December 2022 and worked under the direct supervision
of the Supervisory Financial Management Specialist (Supervisor). Prior to
transferring to the Financial Management Division, Complainant was notified that
his workload would mainly consist of auditing vouchers. Believing he had been
subjected to discrimination, Complainant initiated EEO contact on November 3,
2023.

On January 11, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint, alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (Native American/Hispanic), 2 sex
(male), color (white), and disability (mental) when:

    1. on February 28, 2023, he informed the Supervisor that he had attention
       deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and that the repetitiveness of
       processing travel vouchers triggered his ADHD, but the Supervisor failed to
       inform him of his right to request a reasonable accommodation;

    2. on February 28, 2023, he asked the Supervisor for additional responsibilities
       other than processing travel vouchers, and she failed to assign alternative
       tasks;

    3. on March 10, 2023, he became aware that the Supervisor did not approve his
       promotion to grade GS-04 after he received a “Good” school performance
       review although she previously advised him that he would receive a grade
       increase based on a “Good” or “Acceptable” performance;

    4. on March 16, 2023, he contacted the Supervisor to request access to the TOPS
       system, but she failed to provide him with access;



2
  Although Complainant alleged discrimination based on race (Hispanic), the
Commission considers the term “Hispanic” to be reflective of national origin rather
than race. See Angela F. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 2019003846 (Feb.
4, 2020) at fn. 2.
                                          3                              2025001339

   5. on May 12, 2023, he followed up with the Supervisor to inquire about access
      to the SharePoint system and she told him to stand by while other colleagues
      were granted access;

   6. on May 12, 2023, he received a B- instead of an A+ grade for a college course
      because the Supervisor delayed signing documents that he needed for the
      course;

   7. on June 23, 2023, he asked the Supervisor for a reassignment to an office that
      specialized in performing duties related to his college major, Management and
      Information Systems, and she referred him to the Office of Human Resources;

   8. on September 20, 2023, he received a proposed Termination of Appointment
      During Trial Period Memorandum (TADTPM) dated September 18, 2023;
      and

   9. on or about December 11, 2023, he received a TADTPM decision dated
      December 4, 2023.

On February 21, 2024, the Agency notified Complainant that it would only accept
claim 9 for investigation. In its notice, the Agency dismissed claims 1 through 7
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2) for untimely EEO Counselor contact. The
Agency also dismissed claim 8 pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) for failure to
state a claim as the proposed removal was only a preliminary step to an adverse
action. Notably, even though the claims regarding reasonable accommodation were
denied for timeliness, the Agency still investigated that allegation.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before
an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge. In
accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant
to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).
                                         4                              2025001339

In finding no discrimination, the Agency reaffirmed its dismissal of claims 1 - 7
pursuant to § 1614.107(a)(2). While the Agency procedurally dismissed claims 1
and 2, it nevertheless addressed Complainant’s reasonable accommodation
allegations as part of his removal claim.

The Agency ultimately determined that the proposal to remove, which merged into
the removal action, was not discriminatory because the Agency reasonably
accommodated Complainant’s disability prior to removing him. Specifically, the
Agency found that Complainant requested a more flexible schedule due to his
ADHD, which was granted. The Agency noted that Complainant was also provided
with frequent breaks, and additional training and mentorship to help complete his
work. Regarding his request for assignments outside of travel vouchers, the
Supervisor explained that she asked another employee to train Complainant on travel
advance paybacks. However, Complainant was not always available for training due
to his university schedule. The Supervisor added that after Complainant told her that
he wanted to transfer to a different office because he viewed the work in the
Financial Management Division as too boring and redundant, she tried to get him
reassigned. However, based on Complainant’s performance issues, extensive
absences, slow responses to emails, and repeated expressions of not wanting to be
part of the office, management refused to grant the Supervisor’s request and instead
removed Complainant from federal service. The Agency ultimately determined that
the termination was warranted and found that he failed to prove that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

On appeal, Complainant asserts that the final Agency decision should be reversed
for several reasons. Complainant asserts that the Agency improperly dismissed
several allegations for being untimely. He contends that he did not have reasonable
suspicion of discrimination until he received the proposed termination. Complainant
also asserts that the Agency failed to consider evidence regarding his reasonable
accommodation requests, such as adjustments to work due to his ADHD.
Complainant also asserts that others were treated better and allowed to be reassigned
from repetitive voucher work. Lastly, Complainant argues that the Agency’s reason
for his termination, alleged poor performance, was inconsistent with the evidence
because he was never formally disciplined, and he received an “Acceptable” rating.

In response, the Agency argues that the investigation was fully developed, and that
the decision sufficiently detailed why a finding of no discrimination is appropriate.
                                         5                              2025001339

Moreover, the Agency notes that even though it did not accept Complainant’s claim
regarding reasonable accommodation, the Agency investigated the matter and found
that he was not denied reasonable accommodation. The Agency notes that
Complainant previously requested a flexible schedule due to his ADHD and that this
was granted, along with frequent breaks and additional training.

                                    ANALYSIS

As an initial matter, we will address the Agency’s partial dismissal of Complainant’s
complaint for untimely EEO contact. EEOC regulation at 29 C.F.R. §1614.105(a)(1)
provides that an aggrieved person must initiate contact with an EEO Counselor
within 45 days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory or, in the case
of a personnel action, within 45 days of the effective date of the action. However,
EEOC regulation at 29 C.F.R. §1614.105(a)(2) allows the Agency or the
Commission to extend the time limit if Complainant can establish that Complainant
was not aware of the time limit, that Complainant did not know and reasonably
should not have known that the discriminatory matter or personnel action occurred,
that despite due diligence complainant was prevented by circumstances beyond her
control from contacting the EEO Counselor within the time limit, or for other reasons
considered sufficient by the Agency or Commission.

The Commission has adopted a “reasonable suspicion” standard (as opposed to a
“supportive facts” standard) to determine when the forty-five (45) day limitation
period is triggered. Howard v. Dep’t. of the Navy, EEOC Request No. 05970852
(Feb. 11, 1999). Thus, the time limitation is not triggered until Complainant
reasonably suspects discrimination, but before all the facts that support a charge of
discrimination have become apparent. Here, the record reflects that claims 3-7
occurred between February 28 and June 23, 2023. Claims 3 to 7 are discrete acts.
However, Complainant did not contact an EEO Counselor until November 3, 2023.
While Complainant asserts that he did not develop reasonable suspicion until he was
provided with a proposed termination, we ultimately find that the nature of these
discrete acts should have objectively triggered reasonable suspicion of
discrimination by Complainant.

Regarding claims 1 and 2, the Commission notes that the duty
to reasonably accommodate is ongoing. Since Complainant alleges in claims 1 and
2 an ongoing denial of reasonable accommodation, we find that the Agency erred in
dismissing them as untimely. Complainant v. Dep’t of Health and Human
                                          6                              2025001339

Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120130602 (Sept. 12, 2014) (agency improperly
dismissed EEO complaint for untimely EEO Counselor contact when management
continued to ignore complainant's requests for reasonable accommodation, which
complainant asserted were still ongoing). Indeed, we note that the Commission has
long held that because an employer has an ongoing obligation to provide a
reasonable accommodation, failure to provide such accommodation constitutes a
violation each time the employee needs it. See “Threshold Issues,” EEOC
Compliance Manual, at 2-IV (revised July 21, 2005). At the time Complainant
contacted the EEOC Counselor, he was alleging that the Agency remained unwilling
to provide him with the accommodations that he still needed. Therefore, the
Agency’s dismissal of claims 1 and 2 as untimely was improper. We note that since
the investigative record contains details regarding his requests, we will address them
on appeal.

Reasonable Accommodation

Here, even if we assume, arguendo, that Complainant is an individual with a
disability, the record demonstrates that Agency provided him with an effective
accommodation. Specifically, the Supervisor granted Complainant’s request for a
more flexible schedule and also provided him with frequent breaks, and additional
training and mentorship to help him complete his work. The Supervisor also tried to
provide Complainant with other assignments outside of travel vouchers. However,
Complainant was not always available due to his university schedule. Moreover,
while the Supervisor attempted to seek a reassignment, management ultimately
decided that his performance warranted his termination.

Disparate Treatment

Having thoroughly reviewed the record and construing any inferences raised by the
undisputed facts in favor of Complainant, we find that a reasonable factfinder could
not find in Complainant’s favor, as the Agency articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for removing Complainant, as detailed above. At all
times, the ultimate burden remains with Complainant to demonstrate by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s reasons were not the real reasons
and that the Agency acted based on discriminatory animus. Here, Complainant failed
to do so. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.
                                           7                               2025001339

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           8                              2025001339

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter thetime
limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right
to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector

March 23, 2026
Date
