                                         2                             2025004517

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Postmaster at the Agency’s Santa Monica Post Office in Santa Monica, California.
On December 28, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against her based on sex (female), age (63), and in reprisal
for prior protected EEO activity when:

      1.    On October 15, 2024, Complainant was reassigned to a duty station
            that was an increased commute; and
      2.    On November 7 and 8, 2024, Complainant was excluded from the
            End-of-Year meeting.

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the Agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

The Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. As to
claim 1, Complainant’s manager, Manager of Post Office Operations, discovered
that Complainant failed to timely report a large quantity of delayed mail (including
political/election mail) in the Agency’s Delivery Condition Visualization system
on the day in question. As a result, the manager temporarily reassigned
Complainant to the San Pedro Post Office (and later to the Los Angeles District
Office) where Complainant performed administrative/non-postmaster duties
pending an investigation into the incident. On February 14, 2025, Complainant
was returned to her Postmaster position at the Santa Monica Post Office and
received no disciplinary action regarding the delayed mail report. As to claim 2,
the End-of-Year meeting was intended for managers, officers-in-charge, and
postmasters of the relevant area. Because Complainant was not acting as
Postmaster at the time of the meeting due to her temporary reassignment, her
manager instructed Complainant not to attend. We find that Complainant failed to
prove by a preponderance of evidence that the Agency’s explanations were pretext
for discrimination based on any of her protected bases.

Upon our review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.
                                         3                             2025004517

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition.     See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           4                              2025004517

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.


                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025004517

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector

March 25, 2026
Date
