          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                       Office of Federal Sector
                           P.O. Box 77960
                       Washington, DC 20013


                                     Yun C., 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                Daniel Driscoll,
                                   Secretary,
                             Department of the Army,
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2026002341

                      Agency No. ARCESAV23AUG02621

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
April 7, 2026, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Civil Engineer (Project Manager), GS-0810-12, at the Agency’s
USACE Savannah District, Planning, Programs, and Project Management Division,
Military Programs and Project Management facility in Savannah, Georgia. On
September 6, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging she was

1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                         2                             2026002341

discriminated against and subjected to a hostile work environment in reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity when:

   1. On February 24, 2023, the Supervisory Project Manager (SPM) revoked
      Complainant’s telework agreement, which Complainant believed was
      unwarranted and contained inaccurate statements.

   2. On July 28, 2023, while on approved leave, Complainant was asked by SPM
      to host a Microsoft (MS) Teams meeting and provide meeting minutes.

   3. On August 1, 2023, Complainant was requested to work outside of duty hours
      to complete an assignment that Complainant felt was a direct order from the
      Chief of Military Programs and Project Management Branch (Chief).

   4. On multiple occasions, SPM denied Complainant’s requests for her telework
      agreement to be reinstated and stated that he would revisit the request on
      December 31, 2023.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of Complainant’s right to request a
hearing before EEOC Administrative Judge or a final Agency decision.
Complainant requested a final Agency decision. Thereafter, the Agency issued a
final decision concluding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
her to discrimination as alleged. Thereafter, Complainant filed the instant appeal.

Regarding claim 1, SPM stated that he revoked Complainant’s telework agreement
temporarily so that they could have a more conductive environment for
responsiveness. SPM explained that there were a couple of issues that led to the
decision to revoke Complainant’s telework agreement. The first issue arose when
SPM tried to contact Complainant on February 10, 2023, when she was traveling.
SPM attempted to call Complainant again on February 13, 2023, and he did not get
a response. Complainant reached out to him four or five days after his initial call,
and he explained they needed to discuss the lack of communication in her work
status during the duty schedule. The second issue arose less than a week later.
Complainant did not notify SPM that she was taking leave on February 21, 2023,
and went on leave without any kind of advance warning. SPM attempted to contact
Complainant and did not receive a response after several attempts throughout the
day. SPM then went through his emails and saw Complainant sent a calendar invite
                                         3                              2026002341

indicating she was going to be on leave during the morning. A calendar invite is not
the normal or typical way for an employee to request leave. SPM attempted to reach
Complainant during the later part of the same day and did not get a response. SPM
did not hear back from Complainant until February 24, 2023. SPM revoked
Complainant’s telework agreement until a more appropriate time in the future when
he felt Complainant could demonstrate she understood the importance of keeping
him apprised of her whereabouts and responding to him in a timely manner while
teleworking.

As to claim 2, SPM denied that he requested Complainant to host an MS Teams
meeting and provide meeting minutes. SPM stated that he requested Complainant
set up a MS Teams meeting the day before her leave. SPM said that Complainant
sent an invite to the stakeholders for the meeting to be scheduled on July 27, 2023.
SPM mentioned that one of the stakeholders responded that they could not meet on
that date. Therefore, Complainant scheduled the meeting for July 28, 2023, on her
own accord. SPM reported that he did not direct Complainant to set up a meeting
on the day she was on leave; nor was he aware she was on leave on July 28, 2023.
SPM indicated that if knew Complainant was on leave, he would have run the
meeting himself. SPM stated that he informs his employees, if they are on leave,
but must complete a high level or important task, they should adjust their leave and
account for the time they had to work while the leave was scheduled.

With respect to claim 3, Chief denied that he requested Complainant to work outside
of her duty hours to complete an assignment. Chief stated that he would not assign
work to Complainant that required her to work outside of her normal duty hours.
Chief stated that Complainant did not inform him that she was working outside of
her duty hours.

Concerning claim 4, SPM stated that he had one conversation with Complainant
about the reinstatement of her telework. SMP said that Complainant sent him an
email on June 21, 2023, and he declined it because it was only a few months after
the revocation. SMP stated that although communication was improving, it was not
enough time to establish a pattern. SMP reported that he sent a response via email to
Complainant, on July 12, 2023. SMP explained that Complainant’s one and only
request was denied because they had not really established a pattern of
communication by June 2023. SMP said that they had some good weeks where the
communication seemed to improve, and then there were some weeks where
Complainant’s communication and responsiveness was not so good. SMP further
                                           4                               2026002341

stated another reason he denied the request to reinstate Complainant’s telework was
because they had a new hire coming onboard in October 2023, and he needed
Complainant to assist with the new hire in the office. SMP explained to Complainant
that they could revisit the reinstatement in December 2023, because that would allow
more time for them to work on the pattern of communication and integrate the new
hire.

As to the claim of harassment, we find Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s
articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination or reprisal. Further, we
find Complainant failed to show that the alleged incidents, when considered
together, were sufficiently severe or pervasive enough to constitute a hostile work
environment.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
                                           5                              2026002341

https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
                                         6                              2026002341

must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________l Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 22, 2026
Date
