          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                       Office of Federal Sector
                           P.O. Box 77960
                       Washington, DC 20013


                                  Karolyn E.,1
                                  Complainant,

                                        v.

                                Frank Bisignano,
                                 Commissioner,
                         Social Security Administration,
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025000682

                         Agency No. BOS-24-0194-SSA

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
October 15, 2024 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section
501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §
791 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Claims Specialist, GS-0105-11, at the Agency’s Pawtucket Field
Office in Pawtucket, Rhode Island.


1
  This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025000682

On March 7, 2024, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against her on the bases of race (African American), sex
(female), disability (physical and mental), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO
activity when, on October 30, 2023, Complainant's reasonable accommodation
request was not granted.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge. Complainant requested a final agency decision. The
Agency subsequently issued a final decision finding no discrimination or reprisal.
The instant appeal followed.

Here, Complainant requested flexibility in signing in and out of work as a reasonable
accommodation due to her insomnia condition. Complainant alleged that two days
later, she was issued a Notice of Proposed Removal.2 Management explained that
Complainant’s termination was based on multiple instances of absence without leave
(AWOL) and numerous incidents of unprofessional work conduct.
Notwithstanding, management entered into interactive discussions with
Complainant and requested that Complainant submit medical documentation in
support of her request for accommodation. Complainant’s termination became
effective prior to management reaching a decision on Complainant’s request;
therefore, she was no longer entitled to accommodation. Complainant presented no
evidence that Agency management did not act in good faith or otherwise delayed the
interactive process. Accordingly, the Commission finds that Complainant was not
denied reasonable accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

Moreover, to the extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment regarding
her claims, Complainant has not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the
Agency's explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination or reprisal.




2
 Complainant’s removal claim was processed separately as a mixed-case complaint
with appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. As a result, that matter is
not presently before us and will not be addressed herein.
                                           3                               2025000682

                                   CONCLUSION

Upon careful review of the record, we conclude that the preponderance of the
evidence does not establish that Complainant was subjected to discrimination or
reprisal as alleged. Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision is AFFIRMED.


                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)



The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:


      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.


Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
                                           4                              2025000682

77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).


        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission.
                                            5                               2025000682

The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such
requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph
titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




_________________________ Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


April 30, 2026
Date
