           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                   Maricruz Y., 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                 David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                           United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025001665

                           Agency No. 4B-230-0022-24

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 8, 2025 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.
For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events, giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Full-
time City Carrier at the Post Office in Portsmouth, Virginia. On February 6, 2024,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against
her based on her disability (physical) and reprisal (prior protected EEO activity)
when:


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025001665

      1. On October 10, 2023, she was required to work outside of her restrictions
         and management continued to text her phone while she was delivering mail
         to tell her to give an explanation as to why her work performance was poor;

      2. On October 13, 2023, she was issued a Letter of Warning for Failure to
         Follow Instructions (LOW); and

      3. On October 13, 2023, October 14, 2023, and November 4, 2023, through
         November 11, 2023, she was charged Absent Without Leave (AWOL).
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing within
the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as
alleged. The instant appeal followed. Complainant did not raise any arguments on
appeal.

Complainant has not proffered sufficient evidence demonstrating that the Agency's
explanation for its actions was a pretext or that the alleged conduct was based on
discriminatory or retaliatory animus. In addition, the preponderance of the evidence
shows that Complainant was not forced to work outside of her restrictions on
October 10, 2023, and management did not continually text her. Complainant was
issued the LOW because she failed to notify management at her instructed call back
time that she would not complete her assignment and failed to complete an auxiliary
assistance request form. Complainant was charged AWOL because she left work
and did not complete a leave slip. Complainant was informed that she would be
deemed AWOL until she submitted documentation to support her unscheduled
absence. The AWOL charges were later changed to another type of leave.
Complainant presented no evidence demonstrating that the Agency’s reasons were
pretextual.

Finally, to the extent Complainant alleged that she was denied reasonable
accommodation, there is no evidence demonstrating that Complainant was worked
outside of her medical restrictions as discussed above. Complainant claimed that,
on the day in question she was given a route to deliver and that delivering parts of
the route would have violated her restrictions.
                                           3                               2025001665

Complainant acknowledged, however, that she did not deliver those streets and
instead curtailed and noted the mail for those streets. Accordingly, the Commission
finds that Complainant was not denied reasonable accommodation in violation of
the Rehabilitation Act.

                                   CONCLUSION

Therefore, based on our review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.


                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:


      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                           4                              2025001665

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director,
Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular
mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail
addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible
postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
                                         5                              2025001665

You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:




                            Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 21, 2026
Date
