           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                 Remona P., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                          Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.,
                                 Secretary,
                  Department of Health and Human Services
                          (Indian Health Service),
                                  Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2025000727

                       Agency No. HHS-IHS-0453-2023

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s November 8, 2024, final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS
the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Supervisory Clinical Nurse at the Agency’s Mid-Atlantic
Service Unit in Nashville, Tennessee.

On July 27, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination
by the Agency on the basis of reprisal for protected EEO activity when: on May
19, 2023, the Acting Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and the Director of Nursing
(Director) told Complainant that the Agency rescinded its tentative offer of

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                           2025000727

employment because Complainant opposed discriminatory practices in
writing.

Complainant applied for and received a tentative offer of employment as the
Assistant Director of Nursing at the Cheyenne River Health Center.
Complainant was sent a Service Agreement to sign after the agreement had
already been signed by four management officials.            See Report of
Investigation (ROI) at 90. When Complainant signed the Service Agreement,
she added terms to the bottom of the agreement, stating “I agree to these
terms with the exception of bullying, harassment, discrimination or any other
illegal activities or conduct towards me or witnessed by me during the one
year period.” See ROI at 90. Complainant stated that she added the
statement to the Agreement after her conversation with the Director in which
she believed the Director “did not provide a clear statement regarding [her]
prospective duties and expectations regarding this position.” See ROI at 68.
Shortly after returning the amended Service Agreement, she received an
email rescinding the tentative offer of employment. See ROI at 65-66; 172.
She asserted that management rescinded the offer because they “saw [her]
as someone predisposed to engage in EEO activity” and that it was retaliatory.
See ROI at 69.

The Human Resources Specialist (HR Specialist) stated that actually
Complainant modified two official forms that were sent to her after they had
already been signed by management officials, and she sent the changed forms
to the hiring officials to check if they were okay with the additions. See ROI
at 142. She stated that Complainant had never raised any concerns about
the forms in their previous conversations and in her opinion, it was
inappropriate to alter an official document after it had already been signed by
management officials. See ROI at 143. The Director explained that she took
issue with the statement because the way it was added after the management
officials had already signed it gave the impression that the officials had agreed
to the modifications, which she viewed as deceitful and lacking in candor. See
ROI at 108.         The CEO agreed that he believed Complainant acted
inappropriately because the way she modified the agreement made it appear
as if all the parties had mutually agreed to the statement which they had not,
so it was dishonest. See ROI at 126. He noted that it was of particular concern
because accurate documentation was an important part of the role
Complainant would be filling. See ROI at 126-27.
                                        3                           2025000727

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge,
or a final decision from the agency. When Complainant requested a final
Agency decision, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant did not prove that
the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed
the instant appeal.

On appeal, Complainant reiterates that she acted within her rights to modify
the form, and it was retaliatory to punish her for it. The Agency filed a brief
arguing that Complainant did not establish that the Agency’s reasons were a
pretext, and its final decision should be affirmed.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).           See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and
relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the
Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the
three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). A complainant must initially
establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he/she was subjected to
an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the
particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. at 802 n.13. The burden then
shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
To ultimately prevail, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves
v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s
Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).
                                       4                          2025000727

We find that the Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
rescinding its tentative offer because Complainant’s action in modifying the
official form without getting prior approval was deceitful because modifying
the form after the management officials had already signed it made it appear
as if the management officials had also agreed to those changes. Complainant
argues that management viewed her as someone “predisposed” to engage in
EEO activity and retaliated against her and also states that she believes that
under Office of Personnel Management (OPM) rules, she is permitted to alter
an official form. We reject Complainant’s argument as she offered no evidence
beyond her assertions to support it. It is well settled that disagreement with
the Agency’s reasons without supporting probative evidence is not sufficient
to establish pretext. See, e.g., Marjorie C. v. Dep't of Justice, EEOC Appeal
No. 2022001796 (May 16, 2022); Complainant v. Dept. of the Air Force, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120140390 (Apr. 7, 2014). There is simply no evidence beyond
Complainant's unsupported assertions of any retaliatory animus and the
Commission has repeatedly stated that mere assertions or conjecture that an
agency’s explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination is insufficient
because subjective belief, however genuine, does not constitute evidence of
pretext. Juliet B. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120182519 (Oct. 8,
2019); Richardson v. Dep't of Agriculture, EEOC Petition No. 03A40016 (Dec.
11, 2003).

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration.
                                        5                           2025000727

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another
party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement
in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 §
VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work.
                                       6                           2025000727

If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s ignature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


December 11, 2025
Date
