           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                Maynard G., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                                Sean Duffy,
                                 Secretary,
                       Department of Transportation
                     (Federal Aviation Administration),
                                  Agency.

                          Appeal No. 2024002591

                      Agency No. 2023-30089-FAA-03

                                 DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s February 12, 2024, final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as
amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission
AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Supervisory Air Traffic Controller Specialist (SATCS), AT
2152 LJ, at the Agency’s Atlanta Air Route Traffic Center in Hampton, Georgia.
Complainant had held that position since April 10, 2022. Complainant was
aged 57, born in 1966.

Complainant’s first-line supervisor (Supervisor 1) was the Operations
Manager. His second-line supervisor (Supervisor 2) was the Executive Officer.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                             2024002591

Complainant’s third-line supervisor (Supervisor 3) was the Air Traffic Manager.
Report of Investigation (ROI) at 110-11.

Complainant initiated EEO contact on July 20, 2023. On August 9, 2023,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination and a hostile work
environment by the Agency on the basis of age (57) when, on or about July
12, 2023, management issued the Complainant a memorandum notifying him
of proposed placement on enforced leave.

The Agency conducted an investigation. The investigation revealed that
According to the Agency, on May 25, 2023, Complainant notified Agency
medical staff that he had “elevated/abnormal CT [Computed Tomography]
cardiac calcium score,” and this resulted in Complainant being medically
incapacitated from performing safety-sensitive ATCS duties pending
Complainant providing further medical information to the Agency. ROI at 147.
The same day as the incapacitation, Complainant sent Supervisor 1 an email
stating that he could not work stressful duties. ROI at 149. Because the Watch
Desk is a stressful position, Complainant could not work the Watch Desk. ROI
at 130. Until June 11, 2023, other non-stressful duties were not available, but
after June 11, 2023, Complainant was given other duties. ROI at 151–56. See
ROI at 125 reflecting that Complainant had been assigned other duties since
he was medically incapacitated, so he was taking direction and being assigned
duties in other areas by the supervisors in those areas.

On July 12, 2023, Supervisor 3 issued a Notice of Proposed Placement on
Enforced Leave. According to Complainant, upon receipt of the Notice, he
informed management that the letter was harassment and that he strongly
disagreed with the Letter. Complainant asserted that although he informed
Supervisor 1 that the letter was harassment, Supervisor 1 never referred the
matter to the Agency’s Accountability Board. ROI at 113-14. He also asserted
that both Supervisor 1 and Supervisor 3 were aware of Complainant’s
disagreement and notice of harassment. ROI at 112 and 160-62.

On August 24, 2023, Complainant was called to the office of a third named
individual’s (Individual 3) office and tendered a letter of decision to place him
on Enforced Leave issued by Supervisor 3. The August 24, 2023
Letter/Memorandum stated the decision was pursuant to Article 45 of the
Collective Bargaining Agreement. According to Complainant, the Collective
Bargaining Agreement cited was for bargaining unit employees (BUE) and not
applicable to Complainant as a supervisor. ROI at 112 and 165.
                                    3                             2024002591

Complainant alleged that the adverse action of the mandatory leave and
forced sick leave negatively impacted him. He stated that enforced leave
eliminated his ability to apply the accumulated leave toward his retirement,
thus limiting his financial compensation and computation for retirement. ROI
at 112-13.

Complainant asserted that he was provided no alternative but to take forced
sick leave, alleging that he requested alternative work as opposed to forced
leave; and that Agency supervision denied this request and would not allow
him the alternative work options made available to younger employees than
Complainant. Complainant alleged that those younger and similarly situated
employees were supervisors. Complainant identified five named employees
who he alleged had received better treatment. According to Complainant, “the
entire process intentional or unintentional has indicated a pattern of disparate
treatment where I feel displaced in the agency because of my age.” ROI at
18. See ROI at 112–13 reflecting Complainant’s belief that his age was the
basis of the challenged action.

Management stated that Complainant notified the facility that he was
medically incapacitated and that he may never regain his medical clearance.
According to Supervisor 1, the letters regarding enforced leave were drafted
by the Office of Labor Relations. He stated that it was standard procedure to
issue these letters to those medically incapacitated for an extended period.
He also stated that Complainant was given 30 days to respond to the letter,
but Complainant did not respond. ROI at 126.

The Agency asserted that Complainant had been accommodated since he lost
his medical clearance by allowing him to perform other duties. Additionally,
for the days that Complainant took leave, the leave would have functioned as
an accommodation. The Agency asserted that to promote the efficiency of the
service, the Agency issued Complainant a notice of proposed enforced leave
that would occur when other duties were not available for Complainant,
because “the availability of other duties is typically intermittent in nature.”
ROI at 160–61. The Agency also asserted that there were other duties
available since the enforced leave decision was issued, and Complainant had
not been on enforced leave after the issuance of the proposal. However, there
is no guarantee other duties will be available in the future.

According to the Agency, none of Complainant’s identified comparators were
medically incapacitated at the same time as Complainant and then
immediately provided other duties denied to Complainant. See ROI at 341.
                                     4                              2024002591

The Agency asserted that Complainant having to wait seventeen days, which
included the Memorial Day holiday weekend, to receive other duties was not
a situation comparable to anyone else.

One of Complainant’s comparators (Employee 1) was given other duties while
medically incapacitated, like Complainant, but he was able to work the Watch
desk and was demoted to ATCS, unlike Complainant. ROI at 130 and 137.
Furthermore, at the time of the instant complaint, Employee 1 was an ATCS,
not a supervisory ATCS like Complainant, and he had already been medically
cleared to return to duty on April 12, 2023, before Complainant was
incapacitated. ROI at 341 and 362–63. A second Comparator (Employee 2)
was not at the facility when Complainant was incapacitated and was working
at a different facility in another state, Indiana. ROI at 130, 137, 341, and 343.

A third comparator (Employee 3) never became a certified supervisor at
Complainant’s facility and left because she could not certify, and after
incapacitation, she was returned to duty on June 16, 2022, nearly a year
before Complainant was incapacitated. ROI at 130, 137, and 341. A fourth
comparator (Employee 4) took a demotion after being medically disqualified,
and no longer needed a medical clearance as of April 24, 2023, before
Complainant’s incapacitation. ROI at 130 and 341. The fifth comparator
(Employee 5) could work the Watch Desk, unlike Complainant whose stated
medical advice to avoid stress precluded him from working the Watch Desk,
and he was able to medically recertify. ROI at 130. Additionally, Employee 5
was incapacitated and returned to duty on September 23, 2022, eight months
before Complainant was incapacitated. ROI at 341.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge,
or a final decision from the agency. When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency
issued a final decision (FAD) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency
concluded that Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him to
discrimination as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

On appeal, Complainant, among other things, argues that the FAD must be
dismissed on procedural grounds as the investigation and FAD are incomplete
and failed to address the issues raised. Complainant argues that the FAD did
not contain complete analysis for Complainant to adequately respond to the
Agency findings.
                                     5                             2024002591

Complainant argues that he provided evidence ignored in the limited analysis
of the FAD that supports a finding of age discrimination on the part of the
Agency. Complainant also argues that the Agency acknowledged in the FAD
that Complainant raised his medical incapacitation decision as a harm in his
EEO affidavit, yet improperly dismissed the claim and failed to investigate the
matter. Complainant requests that the FAD be dismissed as there is a lack of
support for the decision reached. We will address Complainant’s arguments
below.

The Agency, in pertinent part, argued that its final decision should be affirmed.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires
that the Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and
legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review
the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and
relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the
Commission’s own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, a complainant must satisfy the
three-part evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). A complainant must initially
establish a prima facie case by demonstrating that he/she was subjected to
an adverse employment action under circumstances that would support an
inference of discrimination. Furnco Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576
(1978). Proof of a prima facie case will vary depending on the facts of the
particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 441 U.S. at 804 n.14. The burden then
shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep’t of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
To ultimately prevail, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the agency’s explanation is a pretext for discrimination. Reeves
v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St. Mary’s
Honor Ctr v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

We find that the Agency provided a legitimate nondiscriminatory explanation
for the proposed placement of Complainant on enforced leave after he was
medically incapacitated from his duties and lost his medical clearance, a
condition of his employment.
                                    6                             2024002591

According to management, the Agency’s medical doctors incapacitated
Complainant from performing safety-sensitive ATCS duties due to his heart
condition, if no other duties were available. Therefore, the Agency notified
Complainant of enforced leave placement because he was medically
incapacitated, and the Agency could not guarantee the availability of other
duties. See ROI at 160-62 for the July 12, 2023, Notice of Proposed Placement
on Enforced Leave. Complainant did not refute management’s explanation
with any evidence, and he did not link the challenged action to his age. Nor
did Complainant present any evidence to refute Supervisor 1’s contention that
Complainant is not and has not been on enforced leave; and that any leave
Complainant took was voluntary. ROI at 128-29.

Notably, the Agency assigned Complainant other duties as soon as they were
available, and he did not allege that he was forced to take any leave following
issuance of the leave placement proposal. Complainant himself asserted that
he was assigned other duties since he was medically incapacitated. ROI at
125. More importantly, because Complainant was not placed on enforced
leave, he did not suffer any loss or harm to any term, condition, or privilege
of employment. We find Complainant’s arguments that his use of sick leave
negatively impacted his retirement compensation to be unavailing because he
failed to cite to any applicable policy requiring employees to accumulate
accrued leave in order to increase retirement benefits. Supervisor 3 also
stated, and Complainant did not dispute, that Complainant was still getting
"good time" toward his retirement eligibility and compensation. ROI at 138,
185-90, 227, 244-45, and 447-68.

Complainant also failed to identify any substantially younger employees who
were similarly situated but received more favorable treatment under similar
circumstances. He provided no evidence to support a conclusion that the
circumstances of the five comparators he identified were identical to his. Nor
did Complainant cite to any ageist comments directed at him by management.
Therefore, Complainant failed to demonstrate that the Agency’s statements
were pretextual or that the challenged management action was motivated by
discriminatory animus based on his age.

Complainant asserted that he informed management that he disagreed with
the July 12, 2023, proposal letter, and that it was harassment. Supervisor 1
denied Complainant’s assertion. Complainant’s harassment allegation is also
precluded by our determination that the alleged management action was not
motivated by discrimination.
                                    7                             2024002591

On appeal, Complainant argued that he did not request a hearing because he
did not receive the ROI or the hearing request form. The Agency explained
that for his formal complaint, the email Complainant entered and confirmed
was his “first initial/his last name@hotmail.com,” and the ROI and hearing
request form was sent to this same email address, as well as Complainant’s
agency email address, on November 8, 2023. ROI at 15. Complainant did not
allege that he had no access to his work email or that the hotmail address was
no longer his. Nor does the record reflect that Complainant took any steps to
request the ROI or hearing request form when he had not received it from the
Agency. Complainant has provided no reasonable explanation for his failure to
timely respond.

We note Complainant’s appeal argument indicating that the Agency failed to
investigate disability and reasonable accommodation as part of his complaint.
However, the record is devoid of any evidence that Complainant alleged
disability as a basis in his formal complaint. Nor did he identify reasonable
accommodation as an issue to be investigated by the agency. Complainant
also responded “no” to whether reasonable accommodation was a basis in his
formal complaint. ROI at 16–7. Therefore, we decline to address disability as
a basis or reasonable accommodation as an issue in this decision.

We also decline to address the procedural dismissal arguments because
Complainant’s sole claim in the instant complaint has been duly analyzed and
resolved.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
                                     8                              2024002591

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision.
                                     9                             2024002591

If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the
person who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that
person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the
dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work.
If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s sGature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 14, 2025
Date
