           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Foster G., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                Kristi Noem,
                                 Secretary,
                      Department of Homeland Security
                   (Immigration and Customs Enforcement)
                                  Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024001472

                        Hearing No. 570-2023-01258X

                       Agency No. HS-ICE-00480-2023

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s December 8, 2023 final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended,
29 U.S.C. § 701 et seq.

From August 2022 to August 2023 Complainant worked as Mission Support
Specialist, Grade GS-9, in Enforcement and Removal Operations at the
Agency’s headquarters at Washington D.C.

On February 21, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging
discrimination by the Agency on the bases sex (male, gay), race (Black and

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                          2024001472

Native American), color (brown), disability (including lifting restrictions and
PTSD) and in reprisal for prior EEO-protected activity (requesting a reasonable
accommodation). After amendment, Complainant had raised 44 claims of
allegedly discriminatory or retaliatory actions that occurred between August
2022 and June 2023. These included denial of his reasonable accommodation
request, denial of telework, denial and scrutiny of leave requests, a seven-day
proposed suspension, an unsuccessful rating on his performance evaluation,
violation of his doctor’s order for “no lifting using the right hand,” being
accused of theft of a government laptop, failure to address his emails, failure
to provide training, being called on his personal phone, verbal counsellings,
and receiving emails and other communications that were nasty or
unprofessional.

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the
report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge, or a final
decision from the agency. Complainant requested a hearing. On November
7, 2023, Complainant emailed the AJ stating that he no longer desired a
hearing and requested a final agency decision. That same day, AJ assigned
to the case dismissed the hearing and remanded the matter to the Agency.
On November 8, 2023, Complainant requested to reinstate the hearing before
a different AJ. On November 9, 2023, the AJ denied Complainant’s request.
On December 8, 2023, the Agency issued a final decision that concluded that
Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected him to disparate
treatment, retaliation, harassment nor denial of a reasonable accommodation
as alleged.

The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant proffered doctor’s notes,
medical bills, email correspondence from his supervision and coworkers, text
messages. Complainant also submitted various statements, such as one in
which he argued that the Agency had mishandled his later claim of harassment
as a spin-off processing complaint.

The Agency submitted a brief in opposition to Complainant’s appeal.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, the Agency's
decision is subject to de novo review by the Commission. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at 9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining
that the de novo standard of review “requires that the Commission examine
the record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the
previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the documents, statements,
                                       3                           2024001472

and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant submissions of the
parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s own assessment
of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

To prevail on his claims, a complainant must satisfy the three-part evidentiary
scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,
411 U.S. 792 (1973). A complainant must initially establish a prima facie case
by demonstrating that he was subjected to an adverse employment action
under circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco
Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). The second burden then
shifts to the agency to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
actions. Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
For the third component, a complainant must prove, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the agency's explanation is a pretext for discrimination.
Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prod., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000); St.
Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 519 (1993).

For purposes of this analysis only, we presumed, without so finding that
Complainant made his prima facie case. A fair reading of the evidentiary
record revealed that that the Agency had legitimate non-discriminatory
reasons for all of the incidents that Complainant claimed were unlawfully
motivated by animus against his protected statuses. Specifically, throughout
the year’s time Complainant was with the Agency, he was deemed by the
Agency as an incompetent and insubordinate employee. On the very first day
that Complainant showed up to the office, he wore shorts and crocs. When
management advised him that his attire was not appropriate for the office, he
called this advisement an act of harassment. After a co-worker sent him a
message explaining the correct team names and organizational structure of
the workplace, Complainant went to management with charges that the co-
worker was somehow rude or inappropriate. Unable to work with his initial
supervisor, the Agency, upon his request, assigned Complainant to a different
one. Both reported that Complainant was incorrigible in that he would not
take directions or corrections and would falsely accuse them of harassment
whenever they assigned him work or made decisions that he disliked,
especially regarding leave and telework. Furthermore, Complainant was
found by the Agency to be completely inept at his property custodian duties.
For example, Complainant took three weeks to complete a basic office
inventory that could have been completed in a single day. In another
instance, after he was assigned with transferring expensive equipment to
different field offices, the Agency determined that Complainant had sent the
incorrect numbers of units and documented those transfers improperly.
                                      4                          2024001472

Overall, contemporaneous email correspondence and sworn statements from
management witnesses support the Agency’s version of events. Meanwhile,
despite his numerous appellate submissions, nothing corroborates
Complainant’s position that the Agency’s explanations are pretexts to mask
actual disparate treatment or retaliation.

Based on our finding that Complainant failed to establish that any of these
actions were motivated by discriminatory animus, we are precluded from
finding he was subjected to harassment or a hostile work environment. See
Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

Finally, we reject Complainant’s claims that the Agency improperly denied his
request for reasonable accommodations.           To the contrary, some of
Complainant’s requests, such as an office with a window and a comfort animal
were unreasonable. While Complainant was entitled to an effective reasonable
accommodation, he was not entitled to the accommodation of his choice.
Lynette B. v. Dep't of Justice, EEOC Appeal No. 0720140010 (Dec. 3, 2015).
Additionally, we conclude that the Agency fully complied with the
Rehabilitation Act. In good faith, the Agency engaged with Complainant in
the interactive process. Upon deciding that Complainant’s medical evidence
did not support his request for full-time telework, the Agency permitted
Complainant flexible start time and breaks as needed. Thereafter, a final
decision regarding his request remained pending sufficient documentation
from Complainant, which he did not provide prior to the end of his employment
with the Agency.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision.
                                        5                          2024001472

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in
support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed together
with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20)
calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).


          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title.
                                       6                           2024001472

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility
or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also
file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                          __               Carlton M. Hadden’s ignature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


February 5, 2026
Date
