           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                 Casie S., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                             Douglas A. Collins,
                                 Secretary,
                       Department of Veterans Affairs
                      (Veterans Health Administration),
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2025000761

                     Agency No. 200I-0544-2020101740

                       Hearing No. 430-2020-00535X

                                  DECISION

On November 22, 2024, Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s October 24, 2024, final decision
concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging
employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the
following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a
Medical Instrument Technician in the Hemodialysis Clinic, Acute Nursing
Service, at the Agency’s Columbia Veterans Healthcare System facility in
Columbia, South Carolina.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                           2025000761

On February 7, 2020, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against her on the bases of disability and in reprisal for
protected EEO activity when, among other things, on January 22, 2020,
Complainant was denied a reasonable/effective accommodation; and whether
on January 26, 2020, Complainant’s coworker accessed her medical
information without proper authorization or a “need to know.”

Complainant initially requested a hearing before an EEOC Administrative
Judge (AJ) but then subsequently withdrew her request and requested a final
Agency decision instead. The Agency issued a final Agency decision dismissing
Complainant’s denial of reasonable accommodation claim as being the same
as another matter pending before the Commission and concluding that the
Agency was not liable for Complainant’s coworker accessing Complainant’s
medical information. Complainant appealed and on appeal, the Commission
reversed the Agency’s final decision dismissing the denial of reasonable
accommodation claim and addressed it on the merits, finding that the Agency
violated the Rehabilitation Act when it revoked her prior approved reasonable
accommodation by changing her tour of duty based on her usage of sick leave
for her medical appointments. See Casie S. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., EEOC
Appeal No. 2023002574 (May 20, 2024). The Commission also found that the
Agency violated the Rehabilitation Act when Complainant’s coworker accessed
Complainant’s electronic medical appointment schedule in the patient records
system without a “need to know.” The Commission therefore ordered the
Agency to provide training to the responsible management officials, consider
discipline for the responsible management officials, conduct a supplemental
investigation into compensatory damages, and post a notice of the finding.

Complainant requested compensatory damages of $80,000 for the
exacerbation of her pre-existing mental conditions and the worsening of her
mental state for which she has required therapy. 2 In support of her request,
Complainant submitted an affidavit attesting to the harm she suffered, stating
that as a result of the Agency’s discriminatory behavior, she was forced to
medically retire in April 2021, she lost weight, her hair has fallen out, and she
suffered bouts of depression and paranoia.




2
  Although the Agency’s decision on compensatory damages stated that
Complainant did not specify an amount of damages in her affidavit, in her brief
to the Agency supporting her request, she argued that $80,000 was an
appropriate award considering the nature and severity of the harms
Complainant’s suffered.
                                        3                           2025000761

She asserted that she stopped riding her motorcycle which she used to enjoy,
broke up with her ex-fiancé as a result of the mood swings she experienced,
and suffered a breakdown in her relationship with her son who “got tired of
the constant yelling and fussing at him as a result of [her] increased irritation,
anxiety, and sleeplessness” and moved out of the house, moving in with her
sister instead. She also submitted an affidavit from a coworker, who asserted
that Complainant frequently expressed her frustration over her changed
schedule and told her that she had lost her appetite and was having trouble
sleeping, and that Complainant became upset, teary, and aggravated over
their coworker’s accessing Complainant’s medical information. Complainant
also submitted invoices for medical appointments from February 20, 2020,
through May 2022 for a total amount of $1,205.00.

The Agency issued a final decision regarding Complainant’s entitlement to
compensatory damages on October 24, 2024.                The Agency awarded
Complainant a total of $300.00 in pecuniary compensatory damages,
comprising 25% of the cost of Complainant’s counseling appointments as it
estimated that the Agency’s actions resulted in some increase of the frequency
of Complainant’s appointments, but that Complainant did not establish a
causal nexus between the Agency’s actions and all of her medical
appointments. The Agency further found that Complainant was entitled to
$25,000 in nonpecuniary compensatory damages for the emotional harm she
suffered as a result of the Agency’s denial of a reasonable accommodation and
an additional $3,000 for the emotional harm she suffered as a result of her
coworker unlawfully accessing her confidential medical information as the
evidence indicated it was a one-time occurrence with no other information of
any specific harm resulting from the incident.

Complainant appealed, arguing that the Agency’s award of a total of $28,000
was inadequate to compensate Complainant for the extent and severity of the
emotional harm she suffered and also challenging the Agency’s failure to
award attorney’s fees. 3 Complainant also challenges the Agency’s failure to
restore her leave and provide her with backpay. In response, the Agency
argued that its award of damages was consistent with prior case law and
should be affirmed.

3
  To the extent Complainant asks the Commission on appeal to act on her
outstanding fee petition before the Agency, we note that as the Agency did
not issue any sort of determination regarding attorney’s fees in a final
decision, the issue is premature and not properly before us. Complainant may
re-submit her petition for attorney’s fees to the Agency. The Agency shall
issue a final decision on Complainant’s petition for attorney’s fees.
                                       4                          2025000761

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by
the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).            See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9,
§ VI.A. (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision
based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).

Pecuniary Compensatory Damages

When discrimination is found, an agency must provide the complainant with a
remedy that constitutes full, make-whole relief to restore her as nearly as
possible to the position she would have occupied absent the discrimination.
See, e.g., Franks v. Bowman Transp. Co., 424 U.S. 747, 764 (1976);
Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 418-19 (1975); Adesanya v.
U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01933395 (July 21, 1994). Pursuant to
section 102(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, a complainant who establishes
unlawful intentional discrimination under Title VII and the Rehabilitation Act
may receive compensatory damages for past and future pecuniary losses (i.e.,
out-of-pocket expenses) and nonpecuniary losses (e.g., pain and suffering,
mental anguish) as part of make-whole relief. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(3).
Compensatory damages do not include back pay, interest on back pay, or any
other type of equitable relief. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(2). In West v. Gibson, 527
U.S. 212 (1999), the Supreme Court held that Congress afforded the
Commission the authority to award compensatory damages in the
administrative process.

Pecuniary losses are out-of-pocket expenses incurred because of the agency's
unlawful action, including job-hunting expenses, moving expenses, medical
expenses, psychiatric expenses, physical therapy expenses, and other
quantifiable out-of-pocket expenses. Past pecuniary losses are losses incurred
prior to the resolution of a complaint through a finding of discrimination, or a
voluntary settlement. EEO MD-110, at Chap. 11, VII.B.2 (internal citations
omitted).
                                      5                           2025000761

In a claim for pecuniary, compensatory damages, a complainant must
demonstrate, through appropriate evidence and documentation, the harm
suffered because of the agency’s discriminatory action. See Sheila O. v. Dep’t
of Health and Human Srvcs., EEOC Appeal No. 2021001250 (June 7, 2022).
Objective evidence in support of a claim for pecuniary damages includes
documentation showing actual out-of-pocket expenses with an explanation of
the expenditure. The agency is only responsible for those damages that are
clearly shown to be caused by the Agency’s discriminatory conduct. To recover
damages, a complainant must prove that the employer's discriminatory
actions were the cause of the pecuniary loss. Id. (citations omitted).

Complainant first argues that the Agency erred in not restoring her leave and
not awarding backpay. We reject Complainant’s argument. Complainant did
not provide any evidence to indicate that the leave she took for her medical
appointments was directly related to the Agency’s actions. We emphasize that
in this case, it was specifically Complainant’s ongoing need to take leave for
her medical appointments that directly led to the Agency’s unlawfully changing
her schedule, indicating that Complainant’s use of leave for her medical
appointments predated the Agency’s actions. See Angelo P. v. Dep’t of
Homeland Security, EEOC Appeal No. 2020000286 (May 24, 2021) (stating
that to be entitled to leave restoration, a complainant must demonstrate a
causal nexus between the discrimination and the need to take leave).
Similarly, Complainant did not provide any evidence that she lost wages due
to the Agency’s actions to entitle her to backpay. To the extent Complainant
argues that she was forced to medically retire due to the Agency’s actions, we
emphasize that such a claim of constructive discharge was not raised in her
complaint and has not been resolved in Complainant’s favor.

With respect to Complainant’s claim for the full amount of her medical
expenses, Complainant’s argument is equally unavailing. Complainant did not
establish that the only reason for which she needed counseling was due to the
Agency’s actions. At best, her affidavit only stated that she required
counseling more frequently than before due to her distress over the Agency’s
actions. She did not provide any estimate as to the number of additional
counseling visits she required because of the Agency’s actions. We find that
the Agy’s estimate of 25% of her counseling appointments is reasonable under
the circumstances, considering Complainant’s known pre-existing mental
conditions for which she was already receiving counseling prior to the Agency’s
actions.
                                       6                           2025000761

We reiterate that it is complainant’s burden to submit evidence to establish
that the Agency’s discriminatory conduct directly or proximately caused the
losses for which damages are sought. See Complainant v. Dep’t of Justice,
EEOC Appeal No. 0120123467 (April 3, 2015). We therefore affirm the
Agency’s award of $300 in pecuniary compensatory damages.

Non-pecuniary Compensatory Damages

Nonpecuniary losses are losses that are not subject to precise quantification,
i.e., emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of
enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to character and
reputation, injury to credit standing, and loss of health. See EEOC Notice No.
915.302, Enforcement Guidance on Compensatory and Punitive Damages
Available Under Section 102 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, at 10 (July 14,
1992). There is no precise formula for determining the amount of damages
for non-pecuniary losses except that the award should reflect the nature and
severity of the harm and the duration or expected duration of the harm. See
Loving v. Dep’t of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No. 01955789 (Aug. 29, 1997).
The Commission notes that non-pecuniary compensatory damages are
designed to remedy the harm caused by the discriminatory event rather than
punish the agency for the discriminatory action. Furthermore, compensatory
damages should not be motivated by passion or prejudice or “monstrously
excessive” standing alone but should be consistent with the amounts awarded
in similar cases. See Ward-Jenkins v. Dep’t of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No.
01961483 (Mar. 4, 1999).

Evidence from a health care provider or other expert is not a mandatory
prerequisite for recovery of compensatory damages for emotional harm. See
Lawrence v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01952288 (Apr. 18, 1996)
(citing Carle v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01922369 (Jan. 5, 1993)).
Objective evidence of compensatory damages can include statements from a
complainant concerning his emotional pain or suffering, inconvenience, mental
anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, injury to professional standing, injury to
character or reputation, injury to credit standing, loss of health, and any other
non-pecuniary losses that are incurred because of the discriminatory conduct.
Id.

Statements from others including family members, friends, health care
providers, and other counselors (including clergy) could address the outward
manifestations or physical consequences of emotional distress, including
sleeplessness, anxiety, stress, depression, marital strain, humiliation,
emotional distress, loss of self-esteem, excessive fatigue, or a nervous
                                       7                           2025000761

breakdown. Id. Complainant’s own testimony, along with the circumstances
of a particular case, can suffice to sustain her burden in this regard. Id. The
more inherently degrading or humiliating the defendant's action is, the more
reasonable it is to infer that a person would suffer humiliation or distress from
that action. Id. The absence of supporting evidence, however, may affect the
amount of damages appropriate in specific cases. Id.

Complainant has the burden of proving the existence, nature and severity of
the alleged emotional harm. Man H. v. Dep’t. of Homeland Sec’y, EEOC Appeal
No. 0120161218 (May 2, 2017). Complainant must also establish a causal
relationship between the alleged harm and the discrimination. Id. Absent such
proof of harm and causation, a complainant is not entitled to compensatory
damages, even if there were a finding of unlawful discrimination. Id.; Wilda
M. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 0120141087 (Jan. 12, 2017) (awards
for emotional harm are warranted only if complainant establishes a sufficient
causal connection between the agency’s illegal actions and her injury).

The Agency awarded Complainant non-pecuniary compensatory damages in
the amount of $28,000. Complainant argues that this amount was grossly
insufficient to compensate her for the nature, extent, severity, and duration
of the harm the Agency’s discriminatory action caused, arguing that she was
forced to medically retire as a result of the Agency’s actions and suffered the
breakdown of her relationship with her ex-fiancé and a loss of her relationship
with her son, as well as an exacerbation of her pre-existing conditions and
suffering from depression and paranoia. We note that the only other evidence
Complainant provided aside from her own affidavit is the affidavit from one of
her coworkers, who largely reiterated what Complainant told her as to the
extent of Complainant’s distress over the Agency’s actions but did state that
Complainant exhibited distress in the form of tears and an increase in
suspicions of the Agency after their coworker’s unauthorized access to
Complainant’s medical information.

At the outset, we reiterate that Complainant is not entitled to compensatory
damages for any emotional distress or financial hardships she has suffered
due to her retiring from her employment with the Agency as Complainant did
not establish that her retirement was due to the Agency’s actions. The
evidence in the record establishes that Complainant suffered an exacerbation
of her pre-existing PTSD and symptoms of depression as a result of the
Agency’s actions, which likely contributed to harm to Complainant’s
relationships with her son and ex-fiancé.
                                       8                           2025000761

We find that the Agency’s award of $25,000 was sufficient to compensate
Complainant for the emotional pain and distress she suffered due to the
Agency’s discriminatory action in denying her an accommodation. We find
that an award of $25,000 considers the severity and the duration of the harm
done to Complainant by the Agency’s action and is also not “monstrously
excessive” standing alone and is consistent with the amounts awarded in
similar cases. See Sandra A. v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No.
2022004548 (Aug. 26, 2024) (affirming an award of $26,000 where the
agency’s failure to accommodate her resulted in hair loss, sleep issues, and
an exacerbation of her physical conditions); Bryant F. v. Dep’t of Homeland
Sec., EEOC Appeal No. 2020002864 (July 21, 2021) (awarding $28,500.00
when the agency's failure to accommodate for a period of 16 months allegedly
caused the complainant numerous days of diarrhea, indigestion, acid reflux,
and stress-related weight-loss); Alejandro T. v. Envtl. Prot. Agency, EEOC
Appeal No. 2019004457 (Nov. 23, 2020) (awarding $25,000.00 when
complainant was denied a reasonable accommodation, resulting in
exacerbation of his pre-existing conditions, chest pain, severe stress,
nightmares, insomnia, stomach pain, panic attacks, weight gain, mental
anguish, and emotional turmoil).

We also find that the Agency’s award of an additional $3,000 for Complainant’s
distress over her coworker’s unauthorized accessing of her medical
information was sufficient to compensate Complainant for the emotional
distress she suffered as a result of the single incident, taking into account the
fact that the record does not indicate that Complainant suffered any specific,
substantive harm due to the incident. We find that this award meets the goals
of not being “monstrously excessive” standing alone, not being the product of
passion or prejudice, and being consistent with the amount awarded in similar
cases. See Keri C. v. Dep't of Defense, EEOC Appeal No. 2022004686 (Aug.
29, 2024) (Commission awarded $4,000.00 in non-pecuniary damages where
Complainant, Complainant's family and friends, and her doctor described
anxiety, depression, fatigue, weight gain, crying spells, nightmares, and
chronic headaches and pain following improper disclosure of her medical
information to her immediate supervisor); Marc L. v. Dep't of the Air Force,
EEOC Appeal No. 2024001679 (May 13, 2024) (Commission awarded
$3,300.00 in non-pecuniary damages where the complainant's Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder was exacerbated when management made an improper
medical inquiry to a medical facility without Complainant's permission); Devon
H. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec’y, EEOC Appeal No. 0120181822 (Sept. 30, 2019)
(affirming an agency’s award of $3,000 where the complainant suffered an
exacerbation of his medical condition due to two incidents of improper
disclosure of his medical information).
                                       9                           2025000761

                                 CONCLUSION

Based on a thorough review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency's final
decision The Agency’s order regarding compensatory damages remains in
place.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the
party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support
of the request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the
request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar
days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration within which
to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
                                       10                           2025000761

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests.
                                       11                          2025000761

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


February 4, 2026
Date
