                                          2                              2026000033

      1. On February 22, 2024, management reassigned Complainant without
         providing adequate training.

      2. On June 3, 2024, the Nurse Manager, Complainant first’s level supervisor
         (S1), and the Chief of Access & Office of Community Care, Complainant’s
         second level supervisor (S2), failed to respond to Complainant’s request
         for additional training.

      3. On June 28, 2024, S2 initiated a Summary Review Board (SRB) against
         Complainant.

      4. Effective July 19, 2024, the Medical Center Director (Director) terminated
         Complainant.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ), or a final Agency decision. 29 C.F.R. §
1614.108(f). Complainant requested a final Agency decision. On September 10,
2025, the Agency issued a decision finding no discrimination. Thereafter,
Complainant filed the instant appeal. Complainant offers no argument in support of
her appeal. Further, the Agency has not submitted a statement or brief in response to
the appeal.

We find the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for removing
Complainant. Regarding claim 1, S1 stated that she did not reassign Complainant.
S1 said, in early February 2024, she asked Complainant if she wanted to remain in
the Gastroenterology Clinic (GI) service as the only RCI RN or move to the Pain
Clinic as the second RCI RN. SI mentioned that Complainant did not want to remain
in GI as the only RN and volunteered to move to the Pain Clinic. S1 confirmed that
management provided Complainant with a written triage protocol and in-person
training with RCI Trainer and the previous Pain RN Coordinator.

As to claim 2, S1 confirmed that she responded to Complainant’s request for
additional training around June 3, 2024. S1 explained that she acknowledged the
request and advised Complainant to continue reaching out to available team
resources, including the nurse educator, the other Pain referral coordinator, the float
RN, or herself, for ongoing support. S1 noted that Complainant had already received
initial and follow-up training, and she believed sufficient resources were in place.
                                         3                              2026000033

S1 explained that Complainant received onsite training in February and virtual
training into early March. Additional remedial training was provided on April 23–
24, 2024, following a discussion about Complainant’s low productivity, specifically,
triaging only 1–3 consults per day, which was below expectations per national
consult directives. Also, S2 stated that she did not receive a direct request for
additional training from Complainant. Instead, Complainant emailed S1 on June 3,
2024, with a Report of Contact requesting additional training. S2 stated that S1
responded by informing Complainant that the Nurse Educator was available
whenever she needed assistance or further training. S2 emphasized that Complainant
had already received formal training on February 21–22 and April 23–24, 2024, and
she was aware of how to request help if needed.

With respect to claim 3, S2 confirmed that she initiated a Summary Review Board
regarding Complainant, due to concerns about her performance during her
probationary period as a Referral Coordination Team (RCI) member. Although
Complainant's performance had initially been documented as fully satisfactory, S2
observed a pattern of "willful idleness," with her productivity falling significantly
below expectations. This lack of productivity caused delays in veteran scheduling
and the processing of consult referrals in a timely manner. S2 said that the Primary
Provider for Interventional Pain repeatedly voiced concerns about the delays. S2
mentioned that the Nurse Educator who trained Complainant, also expressed
frustration over her continued underperformance.           S2 stated Complainant
demonstrated adequate productivity during training, triaging 8–10 consults per day.
However, Complainant’s output dropped when she worked independently,
averaging only 4.3 consults per day, with some days as low as one consult. Despite
receiving multiple training opportunities, including waiving a third day of Pain
service training due to feeling confident in her abilities, S2 said Complaint's
performance did not improve. S2 emphasized that Complainant, as a probationary
employee, was under evaluation to determine her long-term suitability for federal
service.

Regarding claim 4, the Acting Medical Director confirmed that she was responsible
for terminating Complainant from Federal Service. The Acting Medical Director
stated that this was her sole involvement with Complainant's case. The Acting
Medical Director explained that the decision to terminate was based on a thorough
review of the Evidence File and the Nursing Professional Standards Board's
recommendation. The Director noted that the Board had reviewed all relevant
documentation and conducted interviews.
                                           4                               2026000033

The Director found Complainant's statements inconsistent with the documentation
and the feedback previously given during remedial training. S2 acknowledged
playing a role by initiating the Summary Review Board, which is composed of
Complainant’s peers. S2 stated that the Summary Review Board concluded that
Complainant should be separated due to her inability to meet the minimum
productivity standards during her probationary period. The record supports
management’s decision to terminate Complainant based on an established record of
Complainant’s inability to meet the minimum productivity standards during her
probationary period despite numerous remediation efforts and found her testimony
inconsistent with prior responses to her supervisor. We find Complainant failed to
show that the Agency’s articulated reasons were a mere pretext for discrimination.

As to the claim of harassment, Complainant failed to show that any of the harassing
incidents were motivated by race.

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
                                           5                              2026000033

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                                           6                              2026000033

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


March 25, 2026
Date
