           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013



                                Malcolm G., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                                Pamela Bondi,
                              Attorney General,
                            Department of Justice
                           (U.S. Marshals Service),
                                   Agency.

                          Request No. 2025003096

                           Appeal No. 2023004319

                       Agency No. USM-2021-004695

              DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No.
2023004319 (June 5, 2025). EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission
may, in its discretion, grant a request to reconsider any previous Commission
decision issued pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting
party demonstrates that: (1) the appellate decision involved a clearly
erroneous interpretation of material fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision
will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the
agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was an
applicant for re-hire at the District of Southern Texas.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                          2025003096

Complainant was previously a Court Security Officer under Walden Security’s
contract with the Agency’s Southern District of Texas. Complainant filed an
EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him on the basis
of age when the Agency denied his application for re-hire as a contract Court
Security Officer.

Complainant requested a final Agency decision, and the Agency issued a final
decision finding that Complainant did not establish that he was subjected to
discrimination as alleged.    Complainant appealed and on appeal, the
Commission affirmed the Agency’s order finding no discrimination.

Complainant filed the instant request for reconsideration, insisting that the
Commission erred because it did not thoroughly consider the facts in the
record considering the favorable treatment of a younger Court Security
Officer. In response, the Agency argues that Complainant’s request for
reconsideration should be denied, and the appellate decision affirmed.

We reject Complainant’s arguments in his request for reconsideration as they
amount to nothing more than reiterating his previous arguments on appeal.
We emphasize that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal to the
Commission. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), Chap. 9, § VILA (Aug. 5, 2015). Rather,
a reconsideration request is an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate
decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or
will have a substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the
Agency. Complainant has not done so here. While it is clear that Complainant
feels he was treated unfairly when he was not re-hired, he provided no
evidence beyond his assertions to support his arguments and the Commission
has repeatedly stated that mere assertions or conjecture that an agency's
explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination are insufficient because
subjective belief, however genuine, does not constitute evidence of any
unlawful motive. See Leif S. v. Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC Appeal No.
2021004037 (Apr. 28, 2022); Juliet B. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
0120182519 (Oct. 8, 2019).

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission
finds that the request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c),
and it is the decision of the Commission to deny the request. The decision in
EEOC Appeal No. 2023004319 remains the Commission's decision. There is
no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on
this request.
                                        3                            2025003096

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0124)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of
administrative appeal from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file
a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal
of your case in court.         “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                  Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 16, 2025
Date
