                                          2                              2025000618

On April 19, 2024, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency discriminated against him on the bases of religion (Muslim), national origin
(Egyptian), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

      1. On February 14, 2024, management did not select him for Supervisory
         Federal Air Marshal (Supervisory FAM) positions, advertised under
         Vacancy Announcement No. NYCFAM-J2-237078-12194019I;
      2. On March 25, 2024, management did not select him for the Supervisory
         FAM positions, advertised under Vacancy Announcement No. PHL-FAM-
         JZ-325953-122247121; and
      3. On April 4, 2024, management did not select him for the Supervisory FAM
         positions, advertised under Vacancy Announcement No. BOS-FAM-J2-
         164218-122018931.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge or to request a final agency decision. Complainant
timely requested a final agency decision. The Agency subsequently issued a final
decision finding no discrimination or reprisal. The instant appeal followed.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record and construing all reasonable inferences in
favor of Complainant, we find that Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case
of discrimination based on religion, national origin, or reprisal. The record does not
demonstrate that the selecting officials were aware of Complainant’s protected
classes or prior EEO activity. Additionally, Complainant has not shown that
individuals outside of his protected classes were treated more favorably under
similar circumstances.

Further, the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the non-
selections. Specifically, the evidence reflects that Complainant was not selected
because his scores in the structured evaluation process were significantly lower than
those of the selected candidates, and his resume did not sufficiently demonstrate the
required competencies. Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s explanation is
pretext for discrimination or reprisal.
                                           3                               2025000618

Upon careful review of the record, we conclude that the preponderance of the
evidence does not establish that Complainant was subjected to discrimination or
reprisal as alleged. Accordingly, the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination is AFFIRMED.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                           4                              2025000618

Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof
of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).


        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025000618

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 23, 2026
Date
