           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                  Ariel L., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                          United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2025001795

                          Agency No. 1C-7310289-24

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 21, 2025 final decision concerning his equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et
seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final
decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail
Processing Clerk at the Agency’s Processing and Distribution Center in Dallas,
Texas.



1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                         2                             2025001795

On June 25, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the basis of disability (back) when on April 15, 2024,
he alleged he was not provided work accommodations and sent home due to
refusing a modified job offer.

The record shows that Complainant was injured on the job causing him to have a
lower and mid-back injury. Complainant stated in his affidavit that he cannot lift
over 25 pounds or engage in prolonged standing or sitting. Complainant identified
his restrictions as “I work 3 hours in two different areas since I can’t do a full 8
hours in my normal job.” Complainant reported receiving a break every 30
minutes. The record shows that Complainant submitted an updated medical
restriction form dated March 21, 2024, which identified his restrictions including
intermittent lifting of up to 25 pounds, standing two hours, walking two hours,
bending/stooping three hours, simple grasping seven hours, and reaching above
shoulder three hours. The record does not contain any other evidence of
communication that could constitute a request for a reasonable accommodation.
On April 8, 2024, the Agency offered Complainant a modified assignment
explicitly referencing the limitations in Complainant’s updated medical file and
identified that he could work as a mail processing clerk that involved mail
processing up to 4 hours and sorting mail for up to four hours. Complainant,
however, indicated on the form that he refused to work the modified position
because it contradicted his restrictions. Manager stated that when Complainant
rejected the modified assignment, he sent Complainant home. The record does not
contain any evidence that Complainant identified any further information about
what activities he could or could not perform to the Agency.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a
hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency
issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the
Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him
to discrimination as alleged.

We find that the foregoing circumstances do not establish that the Agency denied
Complainant a reasonable accommodation. The record shows that the parties
engaged in an interactive process where Complainant reported his injury, provided
medical documentation associated with his limitation, and the Agency provided an
                                        3                             2025001795

accommodation which reflected the limitations contained in the medical
documentation Complainant provided. When Complainant denied the offered
accommodation, the Agency then identified leave as the way to accommodate
Complainant, which can also be a form of accommodation. The record does not
contain any evidence which could establish that Complainant communicated
further information about his restrictions that would allow the Agency to create an
alternative, effective accommodation that would permit Complainant to continue
working. Accordingly, the Commission finds that Complainant was not denied
reasonable accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. Furthermore,
Complainant has presented no evidence demonstrating that the Agency’s reasons
for its actions were pretextual.

                                 CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                          4                              2025001795

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                                           5                              2025001795

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


______________________________ Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 15, 2026
Date
