          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                        Office of Federal Operations
                               P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013



                                Harris K., 1
                               Complainant,

                                     v.

                           Dr. Troy E. Meink,
                               Secretary,
                       Department of the Air Force,
                                Agency.

                         Request No. 2025003384

                          Appeal No. 2024001772

                       Agency No. 8Y1G2200675F23

             DECISION ON REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

Complainant timely requested that the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission) reconsider its decision in EEOC Appeal No.
2024001772 (May 29, 2025).

During the period at issue, Complainant was employed as a Firefighter at the
Agency’s Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico. On October 4, 2022,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination based on race
(White) and sex (male) when:

     1. On or about February 26, 2022, Human Resources did not place
        Complainant in a valid position description;

     2. On or about July 13, 2022, Complainant was denied a GS-4 grade
        when failing to meet the 52 week time-in-grade requirement.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                2                                  2025003384

Upon completion of the investigation, Complainant initially requested a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative (AJ). However, he later withdrew
his hearing request and the Agency issued a final decision finding no
discrimination. Complainant appealed to the Commission.

The Commission affirmed the Agency’s final             decision   finding   no
discrimination. EEOC Appeal No. 2024001772.

Complainant filed the instant request. Complainant argues that the AJ
engaged in misconduct and that he raised the basis of reprisal in the instant
matter, which was not properly addressed.

In response, the Agency asserts that we should deny Complainant’s request.
The Agency sets forth that Complainant’s submission fails to meet the criteria
for a request for reconsideration.

EEOC Regulations provide that the Commission may, in its discretion, grant a
request to reconsider any previous Commission decision issued pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a), where the requesting party demonstrates that: (1)
the appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material
fact or law; or (2) the appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
policies, practices, or operations of the agency. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c).

The prior decision properly found that the Agency articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.          Regarding claim (1), the
Commission, in its prior decision, properly found that Complainant was placed
in a valid position description until his July 3, 2022 promotion. Regarding
claim (2), the Commission properly found that human resources was
mistaken regarding its belief that Complainant had to satisfy a time-in-grade
requirement and subsequently processed Complainant’s promotion.                In
addition, our prior decision, properly found that Complainant failed to establish
that the Agency’s articulated reasons were pretext for discrimination.

Complainant had the option to continue the instant matter before the EEOC
AJ and subsequently appeal to the Commission subsequent to the AJ’s
decision. However, Complainant opted to withdraw his hearing request and
requested a final agency decision. Thus, we need not address Complainant’s
allegations regarding the AJ.

Regarding the basis of reprisal, the record reflects that the AJ granted
Complainant’s request to amend the instant matter to include the basis of
reprisal prior to Complainant’s request for an Agency final decision.
                                 3                                   2025003384

To the extent our prior decision did not expressly reference the basis of
reprisal, we find this to be harmless error. Even assuming arguendo that
Complainant established a prima facie case of retaliation, the Agency
articulated legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions and
Complainant failed to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
Agency’s articulated reasons were pretext for retaliation.

A request for reconsideration is not a second appeal. See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
Chap. 9 § VII.A (Aug. 5, 2015); see, e.g., Lopez v. Dep’t of Agric., EEOC
Request No. 0520070736 (Aug. 20, 2007). A request for reconsideration is
an opportunity to demonstrate that the appellate decision involved a clearly
erroneous interpretation of material fact or law, or will have a substantial
impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the Agency. Complainant
has not done so here.

After reviewing the previous decision and the entire record, the Commission
finds that the request fails to meet the criteria of 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c),
and it is the decision of the Commission to deny the request. The decision in
EEOC Appeal No. 2024001772 remains the Commission's decision. There is
no further right of administrative appeal on the decision of the Commission on
this request.

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (P0124)

This decision of the Commission is final, and there is no further right of
administrative appeal from the Commission’s decision. You have the right to
file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety
(90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If you file
a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person
by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal
of your case in court.         “Agency” or “department” means the national
organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you work.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you.
                                4                                  2025003384

You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or
appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not the Commission.
The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                 Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 8, 2026
Date
