           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                Chantelle M., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                                 David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General
                         United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2024002805

                        Agency No. 1F-441-0326-23

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s March 11, 2024 final decision concerning her equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Laborer Custodial at the Agency’s Processing
and Distribution Center in Columbus, Ohio.        On November 27, 2023,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination by the Agency on
the bases of disability (Hidradenitis Suppurativa) and in reprisal for prior
protected EEO activity when: (1) from August 8, 2023, and ongoing, she
was not accommodated with light duty when she was sent home as no work

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                          2024002805

was available; and (2) on September 13, 2023, she was denied a bid
position that was given to a junior co-worker.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Aency concluded
that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination as alleged.
Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

On August 7, 2023, Complainant submitted a light duty request for 90 days,
of a lifting restriction of 10 pounds. Complainant was not a qualified
individual in that she was unable to perform the essential functions of her
Laborer Custodian position as shown by her inability to lift anything over 10
pounds. Management initially determined that there was no work available
within Complainant’s restrictions and referred her to the District Reasonable
Accommodation Committee.           Soon thereafter, management offered
Complainant a higher-level assignment in the Manual Unit until she was able
to return to her bid job. Complainant signed the offer “under protest,” but
ultimately went home without working the assignment. Complainant has
presented no evidence demonstrating that the offered assignment was
ineffective or that there was other work available within her restrictions.
Accordingly, we find that Complainant was not denied reasonable
accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.

Finally, Complainant was not awarded the bid position because she could not
perform the duties of the position. Complainant presented no evidence
demonstrating that the Agency’s reasons for its actions were pretextual. As
a result, we find that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or
reprisal as alleged.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision.
                                      3                           2024002805

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                       4                           2024002805

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations

July 29, 2025
Date
