           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Emil L., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                                 David Steiner,
                                  Postmaster,
                         United States Postal Service
                          (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2025000569

                         Agency No. 1I-258-0010-24

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s October 28, 2024 final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Motor Vehicle Operator, PS-07, at the
Agency’s Logistics Processing and Distribution Center in Atlanta, Georgia.

On April 9, 2024, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging
discrimination based on race (African American), color (black), age (65),


1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                          2025000569

disability (head injury, Post Traumatic Stress Disorder), and in reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity when:

     1. On or about February 24, 2024, he was moved off his assigned run
        and assigned on a run with a different start time.
     2. On February 28, 2024, he was assigned to drive an 11-ton truck,
        but did not receive higher-level pay.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded
that Complainant did not prove that he was subjected to discrimination as
alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal.

We find that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
the alleged actions. Regarding claim 1, Manager stated that Agency needs
required Complainant and all other motor vehicle operators be temporarily
reassigned. Regarding claim 2, Manager stated that both Complainant’s
original route and the temporary reassignment involved driving an 11-ton
truck. In directly addressing rate of pay, Manager explained that Tractor
Trailer Operators, who were also subject to involuntary temporary
reassignment to 11-ton trucks, continued to be paid at their higher pay rate
due to the involuntary nature of the reassignment. The record shows that
these factors did not apply to Complainant, so Complainant did not receive a
pay adjustment. After a review of the record, we find Complainant failed to
show that the Agency’s articulated reasons for the actions were a mere
pretext for discrimination or retaliation. Complainant failed to present any
evidence on which to question the Agency’s asserted reasons other than his
own beliefs and assertions. Furthermore, to the extent that Complainant
alleged that he was subjected to a hostile work environment, that allegation
is precluded by the determination that the Agency's actions were not based
on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. See Oakley v. U.S. Postal Serv.,
EEOC Appeal No. 01982923 (Sept. 21, 2000).

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.
                                      3                           2025000569

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:


      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.



Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).



Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g).
                                       4                           2025000569

Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also
include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their
request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.



Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).


          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.


                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests.
                                       5                           2025000569

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read
the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific
time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




                           __        Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


January 7, 2026
Date
