           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                    Porter P., 1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                              Douglas A. Collins,
                                  Secretary,
                         Department of Veterans Affairs,
                                   Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025002381

                          Hearing No. 450-2024-00277X

                       Agency No. 2003-674-2023-152925

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
March 10, 2025, final order concerning his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended. For the following reasons, the Commission
VACATES the Agency’s final order and REMANDS the matter for further
processing.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Motor
Vehicle Operator at the Central Texas VA Health Care System in Waco, Texas. On
August 3, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against him on the bases of race (Caucasian) and in reprisal for prior
1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025002381

protected EEO activity when on June 16, 2023, the Maintenance and Repair
Supervisor denied his request to voluntarily step down from Wage Grade (WG)-08
to WG-06.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. The
Agency filed a motion for summary judgment. Over Complainant’s objections, the
AJ determined that the complaint did not warrant a hearing and issued a decision
without a hearing.

The AJ found that Complainant failed to establish a genuine issue of material fact
regarding his claims of race discrimination and reprisal. The AJ determined that the
Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for denying
Complainant’s request to voluntarily downgrade to WG-06, namely a critical
shortage of WG-08 drivers. Complainant argued that this was pretext and asserted
that Coworker-1 (African American) was allowed to step down, despite
Complainant making his request first. The AJ, however, found that although
Coworker-1 had been permitted to step down, management acknowledged that doing
so was a mistake. The AJ concluded that this did not establish pretext. As to reprisal,
the AJ found that Complainant’s prior EEO activity occurred approximately 18
months before the challenged action and was too remote, without additional
evidence, to support an inference of reprisal. Consequently, the AJ granted the
Agency’s motion and entered judgment in favor of the Agency. The Agency
subsequently issued a final order implementing the AJ’s finding that the Agency did
not subject him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

On appeal, Complainant argues that the AJ improperly granted summary judgment
by resolving disputed issues of material fact and credibility without a hearing.
Specifically, Complainant contends that the AJ failed to fully analyze his arguments,
misunderstood his comparator evidence, improperly accepted the Agency’s staffing
shortage explanation without considering evidence that management created the
shortage, and failed to recognize that he established prima facie cases of race
discrimination and reprisal. Complainant argues that management’s explanation for
denying his request based on staffing concerns was pretextual because his facility
has never been fully staffed and management’s concerns about staffing were
historically addressed by employing contractors to cover the shortage.
                                          3                              2025002381

Complainant asserts that witness statements support his allegation that his request to
voluntarily demote was submitted before that of Coworker-1, who was then later
granted the same request, thereby raising a genuine issue regarding whether the
Agency’s proffered explanation was pretext for discrimination. He argues that
management’s refusal to allow him to downgrade to the WG-06 level caused him
significant harm due to all the overtime he was required to work as a WG-08 worker.
The Agency reiterates prior statements and requests that the Commission affirm the
final Agency decision.

                                    ANALYSIS

We must determine whether the AJ appropriately issued the decision without a
hearing. The Commission’s regulations allow an AJ to issue a decision without a
hearing upon finding that there is no genuine issue of material fact. 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.109(g). EEOC’s decision without a hearing regulation follows the summary
judgment procedure from federal court. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. The U.S. Supreme Court
held summary judgment is appropriate where a judge determines no genuine issue
of material fact exists under the legal and evidentiary standards. Anderson v. Liberty
Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). In ruling on a summary judgment motion,
the judge is to determine whether there are genuine issues for trial, as opposed to
weighing the evidence. Id. at 249. At the summary judgment stage, the judge must
believe the non-moving party’s evidence and must draw justifiable inferences in the
non-moving party’s favor. Id. at 255. A “genuine issue of fact” is one that a
reasonable judge could find in favor for the non-moving party. Celotex v. Catrett,
477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986); Oliver v. Digital Equip. Corp., 846 F.2d 103, 105 (1st
Cir. 1988). A “material” fact has the potential to affect the outcome of a case.

Having reviewed the record, we find that a hearing is warranted because the record
does not clearly establish the chronology of the relevant events. Specifically, the
record does not identify when Coworker-1 requested to voluntarily step down,
whether his request was made before or after Complainant's, or whether staffing
levels were already deemed critical at the time of Coworker-1’s request and/or
approval.

Complainant also identifies Coworker-2 (Pacific Islander) and Coworker-3
(identified as Hispanic) as similarly situated employees who were permitted to
voluntarily step down. Like Coworker-1, the record does not establish when these
employees requested or were approved to step down.
                                         4                             2025002381

Although the record suggests that Coworker-2 and Coworker-3 were approved
before staffing levels became critical, it does not establish when they requested to
voluntarily step down in relation to Coworker-1 or Complainant, and whether their
requests were evaluated under circumstances comparable to Complainant's.

We find the chronology material to this case because it bears directly on the
credibility of the Agency’s proffered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason. If
Coworker-2 and Coworker-3 stepping down created a staffing shortage, as asserted
by the Agency, then a reasonable factfinder could conclude that the Agency’s
explanation warrants closer scrutiny if, as Complainant alleges, management
nevertheless approved Coworker 1’s later request despite the staffing shortage, and
then used the same shortage to deny Complainant’s earlier request.

Conversely, if the record establishes that Coworker-1 requested to step down before
Complainant, and that approval of his request then caused staffing levels to become
critically low, or that the requests were not similarly situated, such evidence may
support the Agency’s stated rationale. On the present record, however, these factual
questions remain unresolved. Accordingly, we find that summary judgment was not
appropriate. See also Wiley G. v. Dep’t of the Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 0120152601
(Nov. 8, 2017) (the Commission reversed and remanded for a hearing because there
were genuine issues of material fact at issue).

We emphasize that we express no opinion regarding whether Complainant
ultimately can establish pretext. Rather, we conclude only that the
investigative record is inadequate and needs to be supplemented so that a well-
reasoned determination on the merits of Complainant’s complaint can be
made. See generally, Stewart v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC Request No.
0520070124 (Nov. 14, 2011) (inadequate investigation); O'Neill v. Dep’t of
State, EEOC Appeal No. 0120083597 (Jan. 15, 2009) (inadequate investigation).

                                 CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we VACATE the Agency’s decision and REMAND the matter for
supplemental investigation and further processing in accordance with the ORDER
set forth below.
                                          5                              2025002381


                                      ORDER

Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date this decision is issued, the Agency
shall submit a renewed request for a hearing on Complainant’s behalf, a copy of this
appellate decision, and the complaint file through FedSEP. The Agency shall
provide notification to the Commission as set forth below in the section entitled
“Implementation of the Commission’s Decision” that the complaint file has been
transmitted to the Hearings Unit. Thereafter, the AJ should supplement the record
and direct the Agency to provide the following information:

         1. When Complainant requested to voluntarily step down;
         2. When the three comparators, as identified by Complainant on page 53
            of the Report of Investigation, requested to voluntarily step down;
         3. When each request was approved or denied;
         4. The decision-making process governing those requests;
         5. Any documentary evidence reflecting the requests or approvals,
            including emails, personnel actions, vacancy records, or other relevant
            documentation; and
         6. Any additional evidence deemed relevant to clarify the chronology and
            decision-making process.

The AJ shall then conduct further proceedings as necessary under 29 C.F.R. §
1614.109, including holding a hearing, if the supplemented record demonstrates that
genuine issues of material fact remain. Thereafter, the Agency shall take final action
on the matter in accordance with § 1614.110.

      IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMISSION’S DECISION (K0719)

Under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(c) and §1614.502, compliance with the Commission’s
corrective action is mandatory. Within seven (7) calendar days of the completion of
each ordered corrective action, the Agency shall submit via the Federal Sector EEO
Portal (FedSEP) supporting documents in the digital format required by the
Commission, referencing the compliance docket number under which compliance
was being monitored. Once all compliance is complete, the Agency shall submit via
FedSEP a final compliance report in the digital format required by the Commission.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
                                           6                               2025002381

The Agency’s final report must contain supporting documentation when previously
not uploaded, and the Agency must send a copy of all submissions to the
Complainant and his/her representative.

If the Agency does not comply with the Commission’s order, the Complainant may
petition the Commission for enforcement of the order. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(a).
The Complainant also has the right to file a civil action to enforce compliance with
the Commission’s order prior to or following an administrative petition for
enforcement. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407, 1614.408, and 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(g).
Alternatively, the Complainant has the right to file a civil action on the underlying
complaint in accordance with the paragraph below entitled “Right to File a Civil
Action.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.407 and 1614.408. A civil action for enforcement or a
civil action on the underlying complaint is subject to the deadline stated in 42 U.S.C.
2000e-16(c) (1994 & Supp. IV 1999). If the Complainant files a civil action, the
administrative processing of the complaint, including any petition for
enforcement, will be terminated. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.409.

Failure by an agency to either file a compliance report or implement any of the orders
set forth in this decision, without good cause shown, may result in the referral of this
matter to the Office of Special Counsel pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.503(f) for
enforcement by that agency.
                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration.
                                          7                              2025002381

A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request
for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for
29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (R0124)

This is a decision requiring the Agency to continue its administrative processing of
your complaint. However, if you wish to file a civil action, you have the right to file
such action in an appropriate United States District Court within ninety (90)
calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. In the alternative, you
may file a civil action after one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days of the
date you filed your complaint with the Agency, or filed your appeal with the
Commission. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title.
                                           8                              2025002381

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or
“department” means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. Filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).



FOR THE COMMISSION:




                            Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


July 23, 2026
Date
