                                          2                              2025001699

   1.     On March 21, 2024, a supervisor (S1) made a sexually inappropriate
          comment to her;

   2.     On March 29, 2024, S1 sent her home;

   3.     On April 26 and May 2, 2024, she was told that she was not allowed to go
          near S1; and on May 7-9, 2024, she was sent to work in a different
          operation; and

   4.     On March 29 and 30; April 1, 6, 7, 12. 19, 20, and 27; and May 1, 2024,
          her work hours were reduced.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and Notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing within
the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded
that Complainant failed to prove that she was subjected to discrimination as alleged.
The instant appeal followed.

The record demonstrates that Complainant’s manager (M1) received a report from
S1 that he was putting Complainant off the clock because she failed to follow his
instructions and became disruptive. M1 met with Complainant and the union
steward to discuss the issue and Complainant reported that S1 had made a sexual
comment to her a few days prior. M1 instructed Complainant to report back to work
Monday and to take Saturday and Sunday as her non-scheduled days while he
investigated the matter. Both Complainant and S1 provided statements and S1
denied making the comment. A co-worker working nearby claimed to have not
heard the conversation. M1 ultimately held a discussion with Complainant regarding
following instructions and a discussion with S1 about possible inappropriate
language. M1 noted that Complainant was a PSE, was shifted as needed, and may
have been moved to another operation due to staffing needs. Notwithstanding,
Complainant returned to work in her normal operation and no similar conduct
recurred. M1 noted that Complainant’s scheduled days off were changed while he
investigated the matter; however, her hours were not reduced.

We find that the alleged incidents insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a
discriminatory hostile work environment.
                                           3                               2025001699

Furthermore, we find that the conduct was not sufficiently material to deter protected
activity. In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the
alleged conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Moreover, to the
extent that Complainant is alleging disparate treatment regarding her claims,
Complainant has not proffered any evidence demonstrating that the Agency's
explanation for its actions was pretext for discrimination or reprisal.

Upon careful review of the Agency’s decision, including Complainant’s arguments
on appeal, we conclude that the Agency correctly determined that the preponderance
of the evidence does not establish that Complainant was subjected to discrimination,
reprisal, or a hostile work environment as alleged. Accordingly, we AFFIRM the
Agency’s final decision.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                           4                              2025001699

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the Director,
Office of Federal Sector, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular
mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail
addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible
postmark, a complainant’s request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS
receives it by mail within five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.
                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
                                         5                              2025001699

You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:



__________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 18, 2026
Date
