                                          2                             2025001711

      during his probationary period on January 3, 2024, Complainant was issued
      a Notice of Termination effective April 1, 2024.

After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report
of investigation, and Notice of his right to request a final Agency decision or
hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative
Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a final decision. On January 14, 2025, the
Agency issued a final decision, finding no discrimination.

The record reflect that an Agency official (Manager) issued the Notice of
Termination to Complainant. She described the reason for Complainant’s
termination in the Notice. Manager stated that Complainant failed to “satisfactorily
perform the duties of [his] position.” Specifically, she stated that he did not deliver
mail in a timely manner and took twice the allotted time to complete his route. In
addition, she said he did not follow instructions.

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review by the
Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a). See Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, at Chapter 9, § VI.A. (Aug. 5,
2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review “requires that the
Commission examine the record without regard to the factual and legal
determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that EEOC “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and relevant
submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its decision based on the Commission’s
own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law”).

To prevail in a disparate treatment claim, Complainant must satisfy the three-part
evidentiary scheme fashioned by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp.
v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Complainant must initially establish a prima facie
case by demonstrating that he was subjected to an adverse employment action
under circumstances that would support an inference of discrimination. Furnco
Constr. Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 576 (1978). Proof of a prima facie case will
vary depending on the facts of the particular case. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at
804 n. 14.        The burden then shifts to the Agency to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v.
Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981).
                                         3                            2025001711

Finally, to rebut the Agency’s contentions, Complainant mut prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Agency’s articulated reason is mere pretext
for discrimination.

To establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on age, Complainant must
show: (1) that he is a member of a protected group; (2) was subjected to an adverse
employment action; and (3) was treated less favorably than other similarly situated
employees outside of his protected group. We note that it is not necessary for a
complainant to rely strictly on comparative evidence to establish the inference of
discriminatory motivation required to support a prima facie case. O'Connor v.
Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., 517 U.S. 308, 312 (1996); EEOC Enforcement
Guidance on O'Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers Corp., EEOC Notice No.
915.002, n. 4 (September 18, 1996).

It is undisputed that Complainant is a member of a protected class and was subject
to adverse treatment (i.e., termination) by the Agency. However, Complainant did
not bring forth any testimonial or documentary evidence to demonstrate that
similarly situated employees outside of his protected class were treated more
favorably. Complainant alleged that two comparators, Comparator 1 (born 1990)
and an older employee, Comparator 2 (born 1956) were not terminated during the
probationary period. However, Complainant did not describe how they engaged
in similar conduct. When the EEO investigator asked him to provide information
about their performance, he did not compare his performance to theirs. Instead,
Complainant stated that he had been very confident about his work and was
surprised when he received the letter of termination. Given the absence of
comparative data, Complainant has not established that he was treated less
favorably to Comparators 1 and 2.

Contrary to Complainant’s contentions, Manager stated that Complainant was
terminated because he failed to meet the essential requirements of his position. She
described that Complainant failed to deliver mail in a timely manner and did not
follow instructions. She compared Complainant’s performance to Comparator 1
and Comparator 2. Manager said Comparator 1 and Comparator 2 did not have
performance issues, they followed instructions, were able to complete their routes
in a timely manner and take on additional work.
                                         4                            2025001711

As discussed above, it is not necessary for Complainant to rely strictly on
comparative evidence to establish the inference of discriminatory motivation.
However, he has given no other evidence, he has not presented any witness
testimony or a statement made by Manager that on its face demonstrates a bias
towards his age. Notably, when the EEO investigator asked Complainant why he
believed his age was a factor in Manager’s decision to terminate his employment
he stated, “I am not sure,” my termination was not handled according to the terms
in the bargain agreement 2. Given the foregoing, Complainant has failed to establish
a prima facie case of disparate treatment based on age.

Moreover, Complainant has not established a prima facie case of retaliation. In
order to establish a prima facie case of reprisal or retaliation, Complainant must
prove: (1) that he engaged in protected activity, (2) that Manager was aware of the
protected activity; (3) subsequently, Complainant was subjected to adverse
treatment by Manager; and (4) a nexus exists between the protected activity and
the adverse treatment. Whitmire v. Department of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal
No. 01A00340 (September 25, 2000). Complainant has no prior EEO activity, and
there is no evidence that Manager could have been aware of it when she issued the
Letter of Termination.

The Agency's final decision finding no discrimination is AFFIRMED.




2
 Employers have broad discretion to set policies and carry out personnel decisions
and should not be second-guessed by a reviewing authority absent evidence of
unlawful motivation. Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248,
259; Vanek v. Dep't of the Treasury, EEOC Request No. 05940906 (Jan. 16, 1997).
Furthermore, Complainant was a probationary employee. Probationary employees
are subject to retention, advancement, or termination at the discretion of an agency
so long as these decisions are not based on a protected category. Kaftanic v. U.S.
Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No. 01882895 (Dec. 27, 1988) (citing Arnett v.
Kennedy, 416 U.S. 134, 152 (1974)).
                                         5                            2025001711

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL

                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.
An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           6                             2025001711

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.
                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:


_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector

March 23, 2026
Date
