           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Hallie X, 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                              Douglas A. Tulino,
                         Acting Postmaster General,
                        United States Postal Service,
                                  Agency.

                           Appeal No. 2023005328

                        Agency No. 4G-700-0048-23

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s August 31, 2023, final decision concerning her equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)     complaint     alleging   employment
discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title
VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. For the following reasons, the
Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Sales Services/Distribution Associate at the
Agency’s Covington Post Office in Covington, Louisiana. On March 30, 2023,
Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the agency subjected
her to a hostile work environment based on sex (female) and in reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity (reporting alleged harassment to management
on November 26 and 30, 2022 and December 2, 2022) under Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 when on November 26, 2022, and December 2,
2022, Complainant was threatened by a co-worker (CW1), and when she

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                            2                               2023005328

reported it, management did not take appropriate action when they allowed
the aggressor to return to the facility when she was working.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the
agency. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame
provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision
pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). 2

In the decision, the agency determined that Complainant was not subjected
to discriminatory or retaliatory harassment as alleged. The agency found
Complainant reported two instances of harassment by CW1. On November
27, 2022, Complainant notified the Postmaster that CW1 threatened her by
stating that she wanted to “see Complainant outside” after Complainant had
instructed CW1 about a task. The Agency determined that the Postmaster
responded to the incident, interviewed Complainant and CW1 individually,
and CW1 apologized and explained the context of her comment. CW1
wanted to talk outside to avoid the two of them shouting at each other on
the floor.     Thereafter, the Postmaster informed Complainant of his
conversation with CW1. The agency indicated that the Postmaster believed
that the matter had been resolved. However, when Complainant alleged
that CW1 made threatening hand gestures towards her, the agency further
determined that management properly responded. In this instance,
Complainant’s supervisor (S1) reported the incident to the Postmaster. CW1
was moved to a different facility, and an investigation was conducted. The
agency found that the results of the investigation failed to substantiate
Complainant’s harassment claims against CW1.

The Agency found that the alleged incidents were insufficiently severe or
pervasive to establish a hostile work environment. Further, the Agency
determined that there was no evidence demonstrating that the conduct at
issue was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. As a result, the
Agency found that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or a
hostile work environment as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant
appeal.



2
  The agency confirmed in the final decision that a copy of the report of investigation was
submitted to Complainant and her former non-legal representative via email. A copy of this
June 6, 2023, email is provided in the record as well as documentation confirming that
delivery of this email was complete.
                                      3                           2023005328

We find that the alleged incidents, even assuming they occurred as
described by Complainant, were more likely the result of personality conflicts
and general workplace disputes and are therefore insufficiently severe or
pervasive to establish a discriminatory hostile work environment.           In
addition, the Commission finds that Complainant failed to show that the
alleged conduct was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. Even
assuming Complainant had established a legally hostile work environment,
we find that there is no basis for imputing liability for the co-worker
harassment to the Agency because the Agency took immediate and
appropriate corrective action upon learning of the harassment.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                       4                           2023005328

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs.
                                       5                          2023005328

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil
action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must
submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the
sole discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do
not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph
titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


July 22, 2025
Date
