                                         2                              2025004558

disability (asthma and high blood pressure), and age (54) when on October 1, 2,
and 3, 2024, and other possible dates, management denied Complainant overtime
by taking mail off his route.2

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the Agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the
Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

The Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. On
the days in question, Complainant submitted requests for 3.5 to 4 hours of
overtime, citing his mail volume and the heat. On October 1, 2024, management
approved Complainant for about one hour of overtime. Complainant was denied
his requested overtime on October 2 and 3, 2024—though he worked his full eight-
hour shift on those days—and instead Postal Support Employees (PSAs)/City
Carrier Assistants (CCAs) provided auxiliary assistance on Complainant’s route.
Complainant’s supervisor, Supervisor Customer Services (SCS) averred that had
she granted Complainant’s full requests, Complainant would have been out on his
route until 10:00 P.M. Complainant’s manager, Manager Post Office Operations,
further stated that Complainant was a poor performing carrier and tended to
request about four hours of overtime daily on every route, which he believed was
“ridiculous.” SCS and another supervisor explained that mail would often be taken
off a carrier’s route and assigned to a PSE/CCA where excessive overtime requests
(i.e., three to seven hours) were made, so as to avoid the carrier exceeding 60 hours
in a work week.



2
  Complainant’s complaint initially included other claims, which the Agency
dismissed pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1) for failure to state a claim.
Complainant does not challenge the dismissal of these claims on appeal. The
Commission exercises its discretion to address only those issues specifically raised
on appeal and declines to address these procedural dismissals. See Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO
MD-110) at Chap. 9, § IV.A (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                         3                             2025004558

We find that Complainant failed to prove by a preponderance of evidence that the
Agency’s explanations were pretext for discrimination based on any of his
protected bases. We also find no evidence in the record to show that similarly
situated employees outside of Complainant’s protected bases were treated more
favorably.

Upon our review of the record, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision finding no
discrimination.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition.     See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
                                           4                              2025004558

five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period.           See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must
be submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission
will consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very
limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
                                         5                              2025004558

time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:




___________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 24, 2026
Date
