           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                Brendan D., 1
                                Complainant,

                                      v.

                            Douglas J. Burgum,
                                Secretary,
                         Department of the Interior
                         (Bureau of Reclamation),
                                 Agency.

                          Appeal No. 2023001566

                       Agency No. DOI-BOR-16-0293

                                 DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s final order on his equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., the
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29
U.S.C. § 621 et seq., and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act),
as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. After careful review of the record
below and submissions on appeal, we AFFIRM.

                           PROCEEDINGS BELOW

During the relevant period, Complainant worked for the Agency as a
Mechanical Engineer in Grand Coulee, Washington. He filed a formal
complaint alleging the Agency engaged in unlawful discrimination based on
sex, age, disability, and reprisal during his mid-year performance review.

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                     2                         2023001566

After investigation, Complainant requested a hearing before an EEOC
Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant withdrew his request for a hearing,
and the AJ remanded the complaint to the Agency to issue a final decision
(FAD). The FAD concluded Complainant had not demonstrated actionable
illegal discrimination. In Appeal No. 2021002878, we vacated the FAD and
remanded the case to the Agency to supplement the record through further
investigation. The Agency completed its supplemental investigation and
issued a second FAD, concluding Complainant had not demonstrated
actionable illegal discrimination. The instant appeal followed.

                          STANDARD OF REVIEW

The Agency’s second FAD is subject to de novo review on appeal. See Equal
Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614
(EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9, § VI (Aug. 5, 2015). To that end, we “review the
documents, statements, and testimony of record” with fresh eyes, and we
make our decision based on “[our] own assessment of the record and …
interpretation of the law.” Id.

                                 ANALYSIS

The gist of the complaint is that a supervisor criticized Complainant’s
performance when they met for the mid-year review. For instance, the
supervisor relayed to Complainant that coworkers reported Complainant in a
prior meeting had raised impractical ideas and then disappeared when it was
time to go out to the field. And at another meeting, a supervisor reported
that he twice had to refocus Complainant when he drifted off topic.
Complainant further alleges that the supervisor during the mid-year called
him a liar and undermined one of his responses.

That Complainant and his supervisor had a difference of opinion is readily
apparent from the record. But Complainant does not persuasively establish
that the foregoing is pretext for discrimination or otherwise tainted by any
EEO-protected consideration.

                               CONCLUSION

Accordingly, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final order.
                                      3                           2023001566

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:


      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
           policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management
Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5,
2015).

 Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.
                                       4                           2023001566

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
                                       5                          2023001566

these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:




________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 9, 2025
Date
