          U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                        Office of Federal Operations
                               P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                Felipa A., 1
                               Complainant,

                                     v.

                              Douglas A. Tulino,
                        Acting Postmaster General,
                        United States Postal Service
                         (Field Areas and Regions),
                                   Agency.

                          Appeal No. 2024002872

                       Agency No. 1C-931-0211-23

                                DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s January 22, 2024, final decision concerning her equal
employment      opportunity     (EEO)   complaint    alleging  employment
discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of
1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was
employed by the Agency as a Full Time Level 4 Mail Handler at the
Greensboro, NC P&DC located in Greensboro, NC. She filed an EEO
complaint alleging discriminatory harassment by the Agency on the bases of
age (DOB: 2/27/76) and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity, when: (1)
she allegedly worked outside of her bid position and was assigned less
favorable duties than employees with less seniority; (2) she was allegedly
called to various parts of the building for meetings and when she arrived at

1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                      2                          2024002872

the area, she was laughed at and told the meeting was cancelled; (3) her
supervisor allegedly called her an “old lady.” 2

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a
hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ), or a final decision from
the agency. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time
frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that
Complainant did not prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination
as alleged. Complainant then filed the instant appeal. 3

As this is an appeal from a decision issued without a hearing, pursuant to
29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), the Agency's decision is subject to de novo review
by the Commission. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405(a).        See Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110),
at 9-16 (Aug. 5, 2015) (explaining that the de novo standard of review
“requires that the Commission examine the record without regard to the
factual and legal determinations of the previous decision maker,” and that
EEOC “review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, including
any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and . . . issue its
decision based on the Commission’s own assessment of the record and its
interpretation of the law”).


2
  As indicated in the Agency’s Final Decision, two (2) additional claims were
dismissed for failure to state a claim as a collateral attack on the
proceedings of another forum (the Department of Labor’s Office of Workers’
Compensation Programs). In Complainant’s Brief in Support of Appeal, she
did not object to these dismissals. Thus, the dismissed claims will not be
addressed herein.

3
  In Complainant’s Brief in Support of Appeal, she states broadly that she did
not request a hearing before an EEOC AJ at the appropriate time because
her representative handling the case had been having medical issues.
Complainant appeared to assert that it was erroneous for the Agency to not
provide notice of her right to request an extension but then proceeded to
request that the Commission “review all the evidence and make the final
decision on this case.” As indicated below, the Commission will review the
record de novo and issue a decision based on its own assessment of the
record and its interpretation of the law.
                                     3                          2024002872

As noted, Complainant alleged discriminatory harassment on the bases of
age and reprisal with respect to a personnel-related matter (allegedly
assigned less favorable duties) and a couple of incidents (allegedly told a
meeting was cancelled, laughed at, and called “old lady”). In order to
establish harassment, Complainant must prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, the existence of five elements: (1) that she is a member of a
statutorily protected class(es); (2) that she was subjected to unwelcome
conduct related to her protected class(es); (3) that the harassment
complained of was based on her protected class(es); (4) that the
harassment had the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with her
work performance and/or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work
environment; and (5) that there is a basis for imputing liability to the
employer. See Celine B. v. Dep’t of Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 2019001961
(Sept. 21, 2020); Humphrey v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC Appeal No.
01965238 (Oct. 16, 1998). See also Henson v. City of Dundee, 682 F.2d 897
(11th Cir. 1982), approved in Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57,
66-67 (1986); Flowers v. Southern Reg’l Physician Serv. Inc., 247 F.3d 229
(5th Cir. 2001). The harasser’s conduct should be evaluated from the
objective viewpoint of a reasonable person in the victim’s circumstances.
Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998).

Upon de novo review, we find that Complainant is unable to establish that
the conduct complained of was connected to her membership in the
identified protected classes. With respect to allegedly being assigned less
favorable duties, Complainant’s supervisor explained, preliminarily, that the
duties of Complainant’s bid position were induction and mail handling,
cutting straps across the mail, and inducting it into the tray management
system. He further explained that there were five (5) induction points and
that he made the decision to rotate all employees (not just Complainant)
among the different induction points to keep workloads equal.           While
Complainant may have been dissatisfied at having to rotate, she has not
demonstrated, by preponderant evidence, that this personnel-related matter
was discriminatorily based on age and/or reprisal. Agencies generally have
broad discretion to set policies and carry out personnel decisions, and such
decisions shall not be second-guessed by the reviewing authority absent
evidence of unlawful motivation. See Hovey v. Dep’t of Housing and Urban
Development, EEOC Appeal No. 01973965 (Aug. 31, 2000). Here, as
indicated, Complainant has failed to adduce sufficient evidence that would
justify second-guessing the Agency’s personnel discretion.           Notably,
“[e]veryone can be characterized by sex, race, ethnicity or (real or
perceived) disability; and many bosses are harsh, unjust and rude.
                                      4                          2024002872

It is therefore important in hostile work environment cases to exclude from
consideration personnel decisions that lack a linkage or correlation to the
claimed ground of discrimination.” See Alfano v. Costello, 294 F. 3d 365,
377 (2d Cir. 2002). See also Vaughn L. v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, EEOC
Appeal No. 0120181163 (May 16, 2019). Complainant’s bare allegation that
the disputed personnel-related matter was connected to her protected
classes is insufficient to establish discrimination.

Likewise, regarding the cancelled meeting, Complainant’s supervisor stated
that he informed his employees, including Complainant, that the meeting
scheduled for that day had been cancelled. Complainant’s supervisor stated
that he did not laugh in connection with this, while Complainant averred that
this interaction had been intended to ridicule her. Similarly, with respect to
allegedly calling Complainant an “old lady”, Complainant’s supervisor stated
that he never did this, while Complainant asserted that she did not hear the
comment directly but was told by a co-worker that her supervisor had made
this comment. We note that the record contains an anonymous, unsworn,
and unsigned document stating that Complainant’s supervisor had said, “the
old lady on the dock got an EEO on me.” ROI at 00083. In sum, we find
that Complainant’s perception that she was being ridiculed based on her age
and/or reprisal, as well as this anonymous, unsworn, and unsigned
document, are insufficient to establish, by preponderant evidence, that the
incidents at issue occurred as alleged.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s
final decision finding no discrimination.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains
arguments or evidence that tend to establish that:
     1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
        material fact or law; or
     2.     The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the
          policies, practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision.
                                      5                           2024002872

If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in
support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed together
with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20)
calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for reconsideration
within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal,
which can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant
files their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of
service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration.         The Commission will consider requests for
reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

         COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States
District Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you
receive this decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the
defendant in the complaint the person who is the official Agency head or
department head, identifying that person by their full name and official title.
                                       6                           2024002872

Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency”
or “department” means the national organization, and not the local office,
facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider
and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                   RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver
of court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court,
not the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny
these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a
civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a
Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Carlton M. Hadden’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


August 12, 2025
Date
