           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                 Petronila B., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                 David Steiner,
                             Postmaster General,
                          United States Postal Service
                                (Headquarters),
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2025001455

                         Agency No. 6X-220-0010-21

                                  DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 8, 2025 final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity (EEO)
complaint of employment discrimination in violation of the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. For the
following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed by
the Agency as a Human Resources (HR) Generalist at the Agency’s Customer Care
Center in Troy, Michigan.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025001455

On November 17, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the
Agency subjected her to discrimination on the bases of age (58) and in reprisal for
prior protected EEO activity when, on or about July 17, 2021, Complainant was
awarded a five percent salary increase when selected for an HR Generalist position,
while a peer selected for the same position was awarded an eight percent salary
increase.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency. When
Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency concluded that Complainant did not
prove that she was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. Complainant
then filed the instant appeal.

Upon review of the record, we find Complainant failed to establish that she was
subjected to discrimination or reprisal. The Agency articulated legitimate,
nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions, namely Complainant’s limited HR
knowledge and experience relative to other candidates. Although Complainant
received a five percent salary increase upon promotion, the record reflects that the
identified comparator who received an eight percent increase possessed substantially
greater HR experience, including prior HR assignments and multiple HR details.
Management also presented evidence that another younger employee, with similarly
limited HR experience, likewise received only a five percent increase. Thus, the
evidence does not support an inference that age was a factor in the salary
determination.

Additionally, Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case of reprisal because
the challenged salary determination occurred before Complainant initiated EEO
activity regarding this matter, which was her only protected EEO activity.
Accordingly, the record does not establish a nexus between prior protected activity
and the alleged action.

Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s stated reasons were pretext for
discrimination or reprisal. The record contains no evidence of discriminatory or
retaliatory animus, and Complainant’s subjective belief that age or reprisal
motivated the decision is insufficient to establish pretext.
                                           3                               2025001455

                                   CONCLUSION

Accordingly, after careful review of the record, we conclude that the preponderance
of the evidence does not establish that Complainant was subjected to discrimination
or reprisal as alleged. The Agency’s final agency decision is AFFIRMED.

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.
Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.
                                           4                              2025001455

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g). Either
party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof of
service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests.
                                         5                              2025001455

Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the
paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time
limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


__________________________             Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


May 18, 2026
Date
