           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                  Harvey D., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                               Frank Bisignano,
                                Commissioner,
                        Social Security Administration,
                                   Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024004095

                         Agency No. PHI-23-0310-SSA

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s June 3, 2024 final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in
violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. For the following
reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Lead Customer Service Representative (CSR), GS-0962-
9, at the Agency’s Field Office in Greensburg, Pennsylvania. On May 15, 2023,
Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging discrimination by the Agency on
the bases of national origin (Pakistani), color (Brown), disability (mental), and
in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                       2                           2024004095

      1. Since February 7, 2023, the Agency failed to provide him a
         reasonable accommodation for his disability when management
         denied his request to telework four days per week;
      2. On February 13, 2023, management issued him a written directive;
      3. On May 3, 2023, management gave him negative comments on his
         mid-year Performance Assessment and Communication System
         (PACS);
      4. Since September 2016, he has been subjected to rude and insulting
         behavior by management, management failed to address concerns
         about co-workers, and management subjected him to adverse
         actions regarding his PACS, written directives, reasonable
         accommodation, and working conditions; and
      5. On October 27, 2023, management issued him an overall rating of
         3.5 on his annual PACS appraisal.

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant
with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of right to request a
hearing before an EEOC (EEOC or Commission) Administrative Judge (AJ).
Complainant requested a final agency decision. The Agency issued a decision
finding that Complainant failed to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that he was subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The
instant appeal followed.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, we first find that the Agency did not
deny Complainant a reasonable accommodation in violation of the
Rehabilitation Act. The record demonstrates that Complainant requested four
days a week of telework. Based on his medical documentation and interactive
discussion, Complainant was offered an alternative accommodation of three
days of telework, which he accepted. Management thereafter updated the
accommodation as needed based on medical information and discussions with
Complainant, and he was subsequently approved for five days of telework.

In addition, we find that the record demonstrates that the Agency articulated
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. Complainant’s third-
level supervisor explained that she issued the written directive to reinforce the
expectation that Complainant would work through his first-level supervisor
and chain of command instead of directly coming to her to address matters
that should have been raised below first. Complainant’s first-level supervisor
stated that the mid-year review comments were an attempt to highlight areas
where Complainant’s work performance needed to be improved.
                                       3                           2024004095

Complainant’s second-level supervisor stated that Complainant’s supervisor
began maternity leave early; therefore, he considered feedback he received
from Complainant’s supervisor, his own observations, and Complainant’s self-
appraisal in rating Complainant on the PACS appraisal. Complainant failed to
show that the Agency’s reasons were pretextual.

Finally, the record reflects all of the alleged conduct amounts to routine
supervision and workplace disputes rather than conduct that was sufficiently
severe or pervasive to establish a hostile work environment. Further, there is
no evidence relating the behavior to Complainant’s protected classes. In sum,
we find that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a
hostile work environment as alleged.

Therefore, based on our review of the record and the contentions on appeal,
including those not specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final
decision.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can be found at https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
                                        4                           2024004095

Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs.
                                       5                           2024004095

Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent you in the civil action,
you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You must submit
the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an attorney
directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter
the time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled
Complainant’s Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).


FOR THE COMMISSION:


________________________                   Gul Chaudhry’s signature
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations


September 10, 2025
Date
