           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                          Office of Federal Sector
                              P.O. Box 77960
                          Washington, DC 20013


                                    Maria B.,1
                                   Complainant,

                                         v.

                                 David Steiner,
                              Postmaster General,
                           United States Postal Service
                           (Field Areas and Regions),
                                    Agency.

                             Appeal No. 2025001668

                           Agency No. 4G-290-0100-24

                                    DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a), from the Agency’s
January 15, 2025, final decision concerning her equal employment opportunity
(EEO) complaint of employment discrimination in violation of Section 501 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.
For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Laborer
Custodial, PS-04, at the Agency’s Greenville Main Post Office in Greenville, South
Carolina.

On July 27, 2024, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
discriminated against her based on disability (physical) when:
1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                          2                              2025001668

      1. From March 5, 2024, and continuing, Supervisor Customer Service
         Support (SCSS) denied Complainant daily overtime opportunities; and
      2. From March 10, 2024, and continuing, SCSS denied Complainant
         overtime opportunities on her day off.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before
an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant did not request a hearing
within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final
decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), which concluded that Complainant
failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant
appeal followed.

On appeal, Complainant argues that she did not know recognize the sender of the
email notifying her of her right to request a hearing and therefore, did not request a
hearing. Regarding the overtime issue, Complainant argues that her medical
restrictions were the whole and only reason for SCSS’ actions. She argues that she
had been working 10 hours for five or six years following her previous OWCP Form
5C. Thus, SCSS’ statement that “at times the number of hours she can work are
restricted” is not true. Complainant argues that only after she provided a copy of an
OWCP Form 5C with every line filled with a ten she was allowed to work overtime
again.

With regard to Complainant’s contention regarding the notice of right to request a
hearing, she was clearly provided with the notice and chose not to exercise her right.
We note that Complainant was provided with the information on how and where to
request a hearing using the communication method used before by the Agency’s
EEO office. As Complainant failed to request a hearing, we find that the Agency’s
issuance of the final decision was proper.

Having reviewed the record, including Complainant’s contentions on appeal, we find
that Complainant cannot prevail on the merits of her complaint. We find that the
Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions.
Specifically, the Agency stated that prior to May 2024, Complainant’s most recent
medical documents included a permanent modified job assignment dated September
5, 2018, which was accepted by the Complainant on September 24, 2018. The
restrictions on this job assignment included a limit to 8 hours reaching/reaching
above shoulder and limit to 8 hours pushing and lifting.
                                          3                              2025001668

SCSS explained that when he took over his position as Supervisor in December
2022, the prior management official told him that Complainant had work
restrictions. SCSS stated that initially he did not have a copy of Complainant’s
specific restrictions but was able to obtain them from occupational health in April or
May of 2024. He further explained that all USPS employees with restrictions are
supposed to update their restrictions every 30 days (or every time they see a doctor)
and are also supposed to carry those restrictions with them at all times. SCSS stated
that Complainant’s work restrictions limited her to work only eight hours per day.
Thus, he explained to Complainant that unless and until her restrictions changed, the
Agency was unable to assign her more than eight hours a day. SCSS stated that once
Complainant provided an updated document, which changed her restrictions
increasing the number of daily hours she was able to work, she was assigned
overtime equitably.

We find that the record does not demonstrate that SCSS was motivated by any
discriminatory animus. Further, the statement provided by the Complainant to the
EEO Counselor corroborates SCSS statement regarding Complainant’s
documentation showing work restrictions and the fact that when Complainant had
her documents updated, she was allowed to work as many hours as the new
document indicates.

Regarding the comparators identified by Complainant, we find that both alleged
comparators were not similarly situated to Complainant because they did not have
any work restrictions. The Commission finds that Complainant failed to prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the agency’s reasons for its actions are pretext
for discrimination.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record and construing any inferences raised by the
undisputed facts in favor of Complainant, we conclude that the Agency correctly
determined that the preponderance of the evidence did not establish that
Complainant was discriminated against by the Agency as alleged. Accordingly, we
AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.
                                           4                               2025001668

                     STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                         RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the request,
that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity
Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B
(Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE,
Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).

Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include proof
of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the EEOC
Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.
                                           5                              2025001668

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances prevented
the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District Court
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this decision. If
you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the complaint the person
who is the official Agency head or department head, identifying that person by their
full name and official title. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of your case
in court. “Agency” or “department” means the national organization, and not the
local office, facility or department in which you work. If you file a request to
reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the
administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you. You
must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).

FOR THE COMMISSION:

_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector

June 22, 2026
Date
