           U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
                         Office of Federal Operations
                                P.O. Box 77960
                           Washington, DC 20013


                                   Curt R., 1
                                 Complainant,

                                       v.

                                 Scott Bessent,
                                   Secretary,
                          Department of the Treasury
                  (Office of the Comptroller of the Currency),
                                    Agency.

                            Appeal No. 2024002047

                           Agency No. OCC-23-0575

                                   DECISION

Complainant filed an appeal with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC or Commission), pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(a),
from the Agency’s January 17, 2024 final decision concerning his equal
employment opportunity (EEO) complaint alleging employment discrimination
in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Rehabilitation Act), as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq., and the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, 29 U.S.C. §
621 et seq. For the following reasons, the Commission AFFIRMS the Agency’s
final decision.

At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant was employed
by the Agency as a Bank Examiner at the Agency’s Large Bank Supervision
Office in McLean, Virginia.




1
 This case has been randomly assigned a pseudonym which will replace
Complainant’s name when the decision is published to non-parties and the
Commission’s website.
                                        2                           2024002047

On July 17, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency
subjected him to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the bases
of race (Indian-America), national origin (India), sex (male), disability
(Amblyopia), age (51), and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when:

      1. On March 21, 2023, Complainant was terminated during his
         probationary period;

      2. Complainant was denied reasonable accommodation, which was
         requested in September 2022; and

      3. Complainant was subjected to various acts of harassment, including
         but not limited to, he was not given one-on-one meetings or
         feedback, Complainant’s supervisor discouraged Complainant from
         copying her on emails, his complaints were ignored, Complainant’s
         supervisor threatened to terminate Complainant’s employment, and
         Complainant’s supervisor denied Complainant’s request to serve on
         an interview panel.

At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with
a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing
before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision from the agency.
When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided
in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29
C.F.R. § 1614.110(b).        In the decision, the Agency concluded that
Complainant did not prove that he was subjected to discrimination or reprisal
as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

Having thoroughly reviewed the record, we find that Complainant’s
termination during his probationary period was due to documented
performance deficiencies, including failure to accept feedback and lack of
improvement. Further, Complainant was granted the reasonable
accommodation he requested (iPad and stylus) and offered an alternative
(two-in-one laptop), which was declined, and there was no evidence the
accommodations were ineffective or unreasonably denied. Finally, we find
that the conduct alleged was not severe or pervasive enough to rise to the
level of a discriminatory hostile work environment nor sufficiently material to
deter protected activity. In addition, the Commission finds that Complainant
failed to show that the alleged conduct was based on discriminatory or
retaliatory animus.
                                       3                           2024002047

Therefore, based on our review of the record, including those arguments not
specifically addressed herein, we AFFIRM the Agency’s final decision.

                    STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M0425)

The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments
or evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or
      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal
Operations (OFO) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this
decision. If the party requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or
brief in support of the request, that statement or brief must be filed
together with the request for reconsideration. A party shall have
twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of another party’s request for
reconsideration within which to submit a brief or statement in opposition. See
29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive
for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).

Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any
statement or brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which
can    be     found     at    https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx.
Alternatively, Complainant can submit their request and arguments to the
Director, Office of Federal Operations, Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box 77960, Washington, DC
20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street, NE, Washington, DC
20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s request to
reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFO receives it by mail within five
days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format
via the EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.403(g). Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition
must also include proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files
their request via the EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is
required.
                                        4                           2024002047

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the
party’s request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating
circumstances prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting
documentation must be submitted together with the request for
reconsideration. The Commission will consider requests for reconsideration
filed after the deadline only in very limited circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. §
1614.604(f).

          COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)

You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so
may result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department”
means the national organization, and not the local office, facility or
department in which you work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file
a civil action, filing a civil action will terminate the administrative
processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to
do so, you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil
action without paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an
attorney to represent you in the civil action, you may request the court to
appoint an attorney for you. You must submit the requests for waiver of
court costs or appointment of an attorney directly to the court, not
the Commission. The court has the sole discretion to grant or deny these
types of requests. Such requests do not alter the time limits for filing a civil
action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s Right to File a Civil
Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:


_______________________              Gul Chaudry’s signature
Gul Chaudry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Operations

August 19, 2025
Date
