                                          2                              2025004448

      1.     Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment when:
             a. In June 2024, Complainant was not offered overtime, but certain
                female employees were offered overtime; Complainant witnessed
                cronyism and an inappropriate relationship between past and
                present supervisors, with the current supervisor exhibiting the
                same abrasive and negative behaviors as the previous one;
             b. On August 13, 2024, Complainant was placed on a performance
                improvement plan (PIP);
      2.     Complainant received a Suspension Notice for three days, from
             September 19 to 21, 2024; and
      3.     On November 22, 2024, Complainant resigned (constructive
             discharge).2

Complainant does not challenge the framing of the complaint. We note the
Agency identified claim 3 as a mixed case complaint and bifurcated it from the
other claims because it alleged an action appealable to the Merit Systems
Protection Board (MSPB).

After its investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a
copy of the report of investigation and, with respect to claims 1 and 2, notice of his
right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge, or a final decision
from the Agency. With respect to claim 3, the Agency notified Complainant that it
would issue a final decision on the mixed claim. Because Complainant requested a
final Agency decision on claims 1 and 2, the Agency issued one final decision on
all claims, with appeal rights to the EEOC for claims 1 and 2 and to the MSPB for
claim 3, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §§ 1614.110(b) and .302(d)(2), respectively.

2
  Complainant’s complaint initially included another claim regarding his supervisor
not attending an alternative dispute resolution meeting, which the Agency
dismissed, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(1), for failure to state a claim. The
Agency also dismissed Complainant’s overtime claim (included in claim 1a) as an
independently discrete act, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2), for untimely
EEO Counselor contact, though the Agency accepted it as part of Complainant’s
overall harassment claim. Complainant does not challenge the dismissal of these
claims on appeal. The Commission exercises its discretion to address only those
issues specifically raised on appeal and declines to address these procedural
dismissals. See Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive for 29
C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110) at Chap. 9, § IV.A (Aug. 5, 2015).
                                        3                             2025004448

The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected
him to discrimination or harassment as alleged. The instant appeal followed.

As an initial matter, to the extent Complainant is appealing the Agency’s final
decision with respect to his constructive discharge claim (claim 3), we have no
jurisdiction to consider it given that Complainant’s only appeal rights for that
claim were to the MSPB. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.302(d)(1)(ii). As such, that
portion of Complainant’s appeal is dismissed, and we shall not address claim 3
herein.

The Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its discrete
actions in claims 1b and 2. Regarding claim 1b, Complainant’s first-level
supervisor, Health Administrative Service (HAS) Primary Care Section Chief,
found that Complainant’s performance was unacceptable in three of his critical
performance elements. The PIP letter identified several examples, including
Complainant having multiple instances of failing to follow certain office practices
(such as completing pre-visit summaries), failing to inform or train his staff on
Agency policies, missing various deadlines (such as for leave approval, attendance
reports, coverage emails, and patient complaints) resulting in Complainant being
below the timeliness percentage required to be fully successful, and failing to
sufficiently capture patient insurance at the fully successful level.

Regarding claim 2, Complainant’s proposed suspension letter charged him with
“Inappropriate Conduct” and “Inattentiveness to Duties.” Regarding the first
charge, in May 2024, an internal fact-finding investigation was conducted after the
Agency’s Harassment Prevention Program Coordinator received allegations that
Complainant had engaged in inappropriate conduct. The fact-finding substantiated
some of the allegations, including Complainant saying that a member of his staff
“smelled like fish.” Regarding the second charge, Complainant failed to provide
coverage emails for the Advanced MSAs and Clinics assigned to him on three
dates in June 2024, despite receiving reminders. Also in June 2024, Complainant
was provided a list of patient complaints that needed to be reconciled in the
Agency’s Patient Advocate Tracking System. The complaints had a due date of
seven days, but Complainant failed to timely act on some of them, resulting in four
overdue complaints. Although Complainant’s third-level supervisor, HAS Chief,
sustained the charges, she reduced the suspension to two days to be served over a
weekend in order to prevent Complainant from losing pay.
                                         4                             2025004448

We find that Complainant failed to prove by a preponderance of evidence that the
Agency’s explanations were pretext for discrimination based on any of his
protected bases.3

Because we find the above incidents were not motivated by Complainant’s
protected bases, they cannot comprise Complainant’s hostile work environment
claim. As for the remaining claim of harassment (claim 1a), we find that the
record is devoid of an evidentiary link between the events at issue and
Complainant’s national origin, sex, or prior EEO activity. For instance, there is no
evidence that Complainant asked his supervisors for overtime or that he reported
the overtime issue to them. Complainant’s allegation of “cronyism,” even if true,
does not itself implicate Complainant’s protected bases. We further find that the
complained-of incidents are insufficiently severe or pervasive (or likely to deter
EEO activity) to rise to the level of harassment. The interactions Complainant felt
constituted a hostile work environment merely reflect routine supervision,
personality conflicts, and general workplace disputes and tribulations.

Upon our review of the record and the parties’ contentions on appeal, we AFFIRM
the Agency’s final decision finding no discrimination (on claims 1 and 2) and we
DISMISS the appeal regarding claim 3.

                   STATEMENT OF RIGHTS - ON APPEAL
                       RECONSIDERATION (M1125)
The Commission may, in its discretion, reconsider this appellate decision if
Complainant or the Agency submits a written request that contains arguments or
evidence that tend to establish that:
      1. The appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of
         material fact or law; or


3
  Complainant argues on appeal that the proposed suspension improperly relied on
a prior reprimand that had been rescinded as part of a settlement agreement for his
earlier EEO complaint and therefore demonstrates retaliatory motive. We find the
mistaken inclusion of the rescinded reprimand is insufficient to prove pretext for
reprisal, as the record fails to show that management’s actions were motivated by
Complainant’s protected bases, especially given the evidence corroborating the
charged misconduct.
                                         5                              2025004448

      2. The appellate decision will have a substantial impact on the policies,
         practices, or operations of the agency.

Requests for reconsideration must be filed with EEOC’s Office of Federal Sector
(OFS) within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of this decision. If the party
requesting reconsideration elects to file a statement or brief in support of the
request, that statement or brief must be filed together with the request for
reconsideration. A party shall have twenty (20) calendar days from receipt of
another party’s request for reconsideration within which to submit a brief or
statement in opposition.     See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.405; Equal Employment
Opportunity Management Directive for 29 C.F.R. Part 1614 (EEO MD-110), at
Chap. 9 § VII.B (Aug. 5, 2015).
Complainant should submit their request for reconsideration, and any statement or
brief in support of their request, via the EEOC Public Portal, which can be found at
https://publicportal.eeoc.gov/Portal/Login.aspx. Alternatively, Complainant can
submit their request and arguments to the Director, Office of Federal Sector, Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, via regular mail addressed to P.O. Box
77960, Washington, DC 20013, or by certified mail addressed to 131 M Street,
NE, Washington, DC 20507. In the absence of a legible postmark, a complainant’s
request to reconsider shall be deemed timely filed if OFS receives it by mail within
five days of the expiration of the applicable filing period. See 29 C.F.R.
§ 1614.604.

An agency’s request for reconsideration must be submitted in digital format via the
EEOC’s Federal Sector EEO Portal (FedSEP). See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.403(g).
Either party’s request and/or statement or brief in opposition must also include
proof of service on the other party, unless Complainant files their request via the
EEOC Public Portal, in which case no proof of service is required.

Failure to file within the 30-day time period will result in dismissal of the party’s
request for reconsideration as untimely, unless extenuating circumstances
prevented the timely filing of the request. Any supporting documentation must be
submitted together with the request for reconsideration. The Commission will
consider requests for reconsideration filed after the deadline only in very limited
circumstances. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.604(f).
                                           6                              2025004448

        COMPLAINANT’S RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION (S0124)
You have the right to file a civil action in an appropriate United States District
Court within ninety (90) calendar days from the date that you receive this
decision. If you file a civil action, you must name as the defendant in the
complaint the person who is the official Agency head or department head,
identifying that person by their full name and official title. Failure to do so may
result in the dismissal of your case in court. “Agency” or “department” means the
national organization, and not the local office, facility or department in which you
work. If you file a request to reconsider and also file a civil action, filing a civil
action will terminate the administrative processing of your complaint.

                    RIGHT TO REQUEST COUNSEL (Z0815)

If you want to file a civil action but cannot pay the fees, costs, or security to do so,
you may request permission from the court to proceed with the civil action without
paying these fees or costs. Similarly, if you cannot afford an attorney to represent
you in the civil action, you may request the court to appoint an attorney for you.
You must submit the requests for waiver of court costs or appointment of an
attorney directly to the court, not the Commission. The court has the sole
discretion to grant or deny these types of requests. Such requests do not alter the
time limits for filing a civil action (please read the paragraph titled Complainant’s
Right to File a Civil Action for the specific time limits).
FOR THE COMMISSION:



_________________________
Gul Chaudhry, Acting Director
Office of Federal Sector


March 23, 2026
Date
