{"conditions":{"rc1":{"status":"review","note":"The path from the Aug. 19 incident to removal and on to the AJ's no-discrimination finding is outlined, but it rests on a summary with no cited underlying evidence (statements, notice text, investigation report), so the conclusion cannot be traced to documented evidence."},"rc2":{"status":"gap","note":"Characterizations such as 'reportedly called' and the profanity, wall-punching, and refusal to leave the floor are not tied to identified witnesses, statements, or documents, and the prior suspensions are listed without sources."},"rc3":{"status":"review","note":"Key dates are given (Aug. 19, Aug. 24, Aug. 31, 2015, the April 24, 2017 motion, the Aug. 21, 2020 decision), but the removal date is inconsistent (Sept. 4 vs. Sept. 11, 2015) and the dates of the prior suspensions and the emergency placement are missing."},"rc4":{"status":"review","note":"The Supervisor's recommendation to the Labor Manager and the Zero Tolerance Policy are identified, but the actual deciding official is not named, the criteria for choosing removal are not described, and there is no record of whether Complainant's or the union's responses were considered before finalization."},"rc5":{"status":"gap","note":"The record is a secondary summary that has flagged its own incompleteness and date discrepancy, so an independent reviewer could not assess whether the evidence supports the conclusion without going to the source file."}},"missing":["dates","sources","record_citations","attributions","decision_maker","criteria","responses_considered","other"],"reason":"This is a narrative case summary rather than the underlying decision record. It gives an outline of events and the AJ's findings, but it does not cite the evidence behind the incident description, does not attribute the statements to witnesses, does not name the removal decision-maker, does not set out the criteria applied, and does not show how Complainant's responses at the pre-disciplinary interview were weighed. The removal date conflict and the self-noted incomplete opening text further prevent reconstruction from the record alone. This assessment concerns documentation sufficiency, not the merits of the removal or the discrimination findings."}