{"conditions":{"rc1":{"status":"review","note":"The path from the Aug. 19 incident to removal and then to the AJ's no-discrimination finding is outlined, but it rests on summaries with no cited underlying evidence (statements, notice, decision text), so the conclusion cannot be fully reconstructed from the record."},"rc2":{"status":"gap","note":"The incident is described with 'reportedly' and no identified source (witness statements, investigative report, or the Manager's account), and the prior suspensions are mentioned without any citation to the discipline records."},"rc3":{"status":"review","note":"Key dates are given (Aug. 19, Aug. 24, Aug. 31, Apr. 24, 2017, Aug. 21, 2020), but the removal effective date conflicts (Sept. 4 vs. Sept. 11, 2015), the prior suspensions are undated, and the EEO filing and investigation dates are missing."},"rc4":{"status":"review","note":"The Supervisor's recommendation to the Labor Manager and the AJ's decision are identified, but the actual deciding official for removal is not named, the criteria are cited only generally (Zero Tolerance Policy), and it is unclear whether Complainant's PDI response or the union representative's input was considered before the decision."},"rc5":{"status":"gap","note":"The record is a secondary summary that flags its own incompleteness and date discrepancy, so an independent reviewer could not evaluate whether the evidence supports the conclusion without the source record."}},"missing":["dates","sources","record_citations","attributions","decision_maker","criteria","responses_considered","other"],"reason":"The record is a narrative summary rather than the underlying evidentiary file. It describes the incident, removal, and AJ ruling, but the incident account has no identified source, there are no citations to the record, the removal date is inconsistent, the prior discipline is undated, the removal decision-maker and the specific policy provisions are not identified, and there is no documentation that Complainant's PDI response was considered. The summary also states that the opening text appears incomplete. A later reviewer with no prior knowledge could not reconstruct how and on what basis the removal decision was reached from this record alone."}