At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Rural Carrier at the Agency’s Acton Station in Granbury, Texas. 1. Since on or about January 5, 2018, to present, and after the route count and adjustment, she has not been paid correctly for working her route; 2. From April 25, 2018, to present, she has not been paid for overtime and/or holiday work; 2 and 3. On December 14, 2018, her request for package assistance on her route was denied. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing. The AJ assigned to the case determined sua sponte that the complaint did not warrant a hearing and issued a Notice of Proposed Summary Judgment. After Complainant failed to object to the Notice within the required timeframe, the AJ issued a decision by summary judgment in favor of the Agency. The Agency subsequently issued a final order fully implementing the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed. The AJ concluded that for claims 1 and 2, in which Complainant alleged she had been discriminated against under GINA, Complainant failed to establish a prima facie case because she did not allege any facts related to the basis of genetic information. The AJ reasoned that in her affidavit, Complainant’s responses did not address genetic information, nor did Complainant allege that management was motivated by genetic information or otherwise used genetic information as a basis for its actions. Regarding claim 3, the AJ found that, on December 14, 2018, Complainant requested package assistance from one of her supervisors, Supervisor Customer Service, who denied the request. The supervisor explained that Complainant had already received some help that day but was requesting additional help even though she had only one additional parcel that met the requirements for additional assistance. The supervisor averred that that package was taken away from Complainant and therefore did not need to be delivered that day. The supervisor also stated that the other packages for which Complainant requested assistance did not meet the applicable criteria, which included the fact that Complainant’s vehicle could accommodate the volume, she was not at risk of missing the mail truck, and that the day’s volume did not merit additional assistance. Based on this, the AJ concluded that the Agency had provided legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for denying Complainant’s request for additional package assistance on the day in question that Complainant had failed to rebut as pretext for retaliation. In her affidavit in the report of investigation, Complainant crossed out and initialed the word “holiday” in the definition of this claim. We therefore find that Complainant’s claim does not include allegations regarding holiday hours.
