At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail Processing Clerk at the Agency’s Atlanta Processing and Distribution Center in Atlanta, Georgia. Complainant stated that she had previously filed an EEO complaint in September 2018, which remained pending before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ) at the time of her affidavit for the instant EEO complaint. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 97. She explained that she suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression as a result of an incident where she was sexually harassed by a co-worker (the subject of her prior complaint), and that she also suffers from back, foot, and knee issues so she is unable to stand or walk for extended periods of time, cannot climb or descend stairs, and has restrictions on bending, stooping, and lifting. See ROI at 97-98. She also stated that due to the PTSD she suffers as a result of the co-worker’s sexual assault, her doctor stated that she can no longer work in the same facility as the co-worker who assaulted her. See ROI at 98-99. Complainant explained that the sexual harassment/assault occurred in September 2019 after which she went on Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA) leave. See ROI at 100. She stated that she was released to return to work at a different facility from her harasser in April 2020, but when she arrived at work, her harasser was still there. See ROI at 100. She further alleged that in June 2020, she suffered a knee injury in the workplace, and she submitted documents to the Agency pertaining to her knee injury in July 2020, but received no response. See ROI at 100. She stated that the Agency’s Reasonable Accommodation Committee requested additional documentation which she had already provided and that they ignored her limitation resulting from her PTSD that required she be moved to a different facility from her harasser, instead focusing only on her physical restrictions due to her knee injury. See ROI at 100. She stated that in July 2021, she was finally given a modified assignment to a different location that accommodated her physical restrictions. 2 See ROI at 100. She went out on COVID leave on August 16, 2021, and then was later hospitalized for sepsis so she was ultimately not cleared to return to work until September 21, 2021. However, Complainant stated that she has not been returned to work because the Agency has refused to accommodate her restrictions, and she has only been told by management that there was no work available for her based on her restrictions. 3 See ROI at 100-105. There is no explanation or documentation in the record of Complainant’s new position or why it took the Agency a full year to move Complainant to a different work facility than her harasser. We emphasize that there is no statement from any Agency official confirming that any effort was made to accommodate Complainant’s restrictions from September 2021 onwards or that such an effort was unsuccessful. Complainant further alleged that she should not have been placed on leave without pay (LWOP) since November 21, 2021, because she was not able to work due to the Agency’s failure to accommodate her restrictions. In January 2022, she was denied a bid position, and the position was instead given to someone who had less seniority, while Complainant was marked “ineligible” with no explanation. 4 See ROI at 105; 108-9. EEO Complaint On May 13, 2022, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the bases of race (African-American/Native American/Cuban), sex (female), color (Brown), disability (physical and mental), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 when: 1. Since November 10, 2021, she was not accommodated per her medical restrictions. 2. Since November 10, 2021, to present, she was charged LWOP. 3. On January 24, 2022, she was denied a bid position. 5 The Supervisor of Distribution Operations stated in her affidavit that Complainant’s bid was denied because she did not receive any updated medical documentation stating Complainant could fully perform her duties within 6 months. See ROI at 152. There is no evidence in the record indicating that Complainant was actually requested to provide such documentation or told she needed to do so as Complainant stated she was given no explanation for the denial. In addition, we note that the Collective Bargaining Agreement specifically states that in such a situation “management may, at the time of the submission of the bid or at any time thereafter, request that the employee provide medical certification indicating that the employee will be able to fully perform the duties of the bid for position within six months of the bid.” See ROI at 337. Complainant’s complaint also included three additional claims, specifically that between April 2020 and November 9, 2021, she was not accommodated per her medical restrictions; that on unspecified dates, her leave was not properly coded as workers’ compensation (OWCP) leave; and on unspecified dates, she was denied insurance benefits. Complainant had filed a motion to amend a pre-existing complaint to include her denial of reasonable accommodation claim for the period from April 2020 onwards but the AJ assigned to her other case denied the motion, finding that the denial of accommodation claim was not sufficiently like or related to her existing claim and noted that the time limits on EEO counseling be tolled from November 11, 2021, the date she filed the motion to amend. See ROI at 17-20. The Agency dismissed the denial of reasonable accommodation claim for the dates prior to November 10, 2021, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §1614.107(a)(1) because of untimely counselor contact. See ROI at 62-63. The Agency also dismissed the claims regarding her leave not being properly coded and the denial of insurance benefits as collateral attacks on the workers’ compensation adjudicatory process. See ROI at 63-65. We find that the Agency’s affirmance of the claims regarding Complainant’s leave not being properly coded as OWCP leave and the denial of insurance benefits were On December 6, 2022, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency found that Complainant did not submit required medical documentation to support her request for a reasonable accommodation or to show that she could perform the positions of her bid position within six months. The Agency also determined that Complainant did not demonstrate pretext for discrimination. The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed.
