During the period at issue, Complainant worked as a PSE Sales and Services Distribution Associate, Grade Level 06 P, at the Agency’s Cape Central Post Office in Cape Coral, Florida. On April 4, 2022, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint claiming she was subjected to ongoing harassment based on her race (“White”) 2 when, in and around February 2022, her first- line supervisor (Supervisor) (African American) made racial slurs and threatened to physically assault her and when she informed management officials, they did nothing. 3 The Agency accepted the complaint and conducted an investigation into its claims. During the investigation, Complainant stated that in late January/early February 2022, she was told by Supervisor not to clock out for lunch due to overtime. She avers when she asked Supervisor if he would input her hours into the computer, he responded, "I'll slap the shit out of you." She stated later, when she asked if she could take her break, Supervisor responded, "people shouldn't be allowed breaks, Black people used to be slaves." On February 3, 2022, Complainant claimed that when she asked Supervisor for clarification of instructions he had given her, he responded, "I'll slap the shit out of you if you don't catch on." On February 5, 2022, she said that when she told Supervisor that a package that was too heavy to lift, he responded she was, "full of shit. You can't lift that?" On February 8, 2022, after she was instructed to bring the wagons around, she claims Supervisor said, "You need to do it because you're White...". On February 24, 2022, Complainant said she said "huh?" when she did not hear what Supervisor had said and he responded, 'What do you mean huh? I’ll slap the shit out of you." Finally, on March 3, 2022, when she was walking out of the housekeeping closet after getting disposable gloves, she said Supervisor yelled, "White people don't steal, they buy their own shit." Complainant said she reported Supervisor’s racial slurs and threats to the Manager, Customer Service (Manager) (Caucasian) and the union, but nothing was done. Report of Investigation (ROI), Affidavit A. Supervisor unequivocally denied making any of the statements alleged by Complainant. He said he believed they basically had a good working relationship until this complaint was filed. ROI, Affidavit B. Manager affirmatively stated that Complainant never reported to her any of the comments allegedly made by Supervisor. ROI, Affidavit C. Another supervisor (Supervisor 2) (Caucasian) stated that Complainant once told him that Supervisor told her he would "slap her upside the head." He said he told her to report the matter to Manager. He denied Complainant told him about any racial comments from Supervisor. He asserted that Complainant told him she did not want to report the matter to Manager. ROI, Affidavit D. Complainant originally also alleged unlawful retaliation but withdrew this claim during the investigation into her complaint, leaving only the racial harassment claim. Agency management has since apparently reassigned Complainant to a different supervisor. Complainant did not raise her reassignment as a claim. After the EEO investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing. However, Complainant did not respond to the AJ’s October 24, 2022 order to submit preliminary case information and did not appear, as the AJ had ordered, at the initial conference scheduled for November 24, 2022. On January 19, 2023, the AJ dismissed Complainant’s hearing request and remanded the formal EEO complaint to the Agency for a final decision. 4 Thereafter, the Agency issued a final decision, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), finding no discrimination or unlawful retaliation was established as alleged. The instant appeal followed.
