During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Taxpayer Advocate in Laguna Niguel, California. On November 4, 2021, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her based on race (Hispanic) and national origin (Mexican). By letter dated November 16, 2021, the Agency accepted the formal complaint for investigation and framed the claims in the following fashion: Whether a co-worker who was an On-the-Job Instructor (OJI), as well as a Lead, subjected Complainant to harassment based on her race/national origin (Hispanic/Mexican) on multiple occasions beginning in June 2020 and continuing through July 2021 when, among other matters, the OJI/Lead: 1. Made fun of Complainant’s accent and said she disliked speaking to Complainant. 2. Tried to sabotage Complainant’s work by creating a list of inventory late actions and expired casework, and purposely gave Complainant misinformation regarding how to process cases. 3. Filled Complainant’s calendar with unrealistic appointments that not even experienced employees could complete. 4. Advised Complainant’s manager to have Complainant process a fraudulent tax return. After an investigation into the complaint, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of the right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge. When Complainant did not request a hearing within the time frame provided in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.108(f), the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), finding no discrimination. Specifically, the Agency determined that “assuming [Complainant’s initial supervisor, S1] made these and other similar comments [as set forth in incident (1)], the statements would be unwelcome verbal conduct based on Complainant’s protected categories of race/national origin/ethnicity.” Final Agency Decision (FAD) at 12. However, the Agency, in its final decision, further set forth that: Complainant has produced no persuasive evidence that management’s actions described in [alleged incidents] 2, 3, and 4 were harassment based on her statutorily protected classes. Complainant’s uncorroborated statements that management was motivated by race/ethnicity and/or national origin to take the actions complained of are not sufficient to sustain her burden of showing harassment…Finally, we note that Complainant’s allegations of harassment were addressed through an internal anti-harassment inquiry, which did not substantiate Complainant’s claims.” FAD at 13. The instant appeal followed. Complainant asserts that the Agency’s final decision did not properly set forth that the alleged harasser was initially her former manager (prior to serving as her Lead and OJI). Complainant reiterates that S1 made derogatory comments regarding her accent since her first day of employment. Complainant asserts that she provided notice to S2 regarding S1’s behavior and requested a change of supervisor, but that S2 ignored the harassment and allowed the behavior to continue. In response, the Agency requests that we affirm its final decision finding no discrimination. The Agency reiterates that Complainant failed to establish that she was subjected to harassment. Regarding the alleged comments made by S1 to Complainant regarding her accent, the Agency sets forth that “[a]ssuming the truth of Complainant’s allegations, nothing in S1’s comments indicate she mocked Complainant’s accent or that the comments were based on her being of Mexican descent. At best, [S1] indicated she expressed difficulty in communicating with Complainant. At worst, S1’s comments were the type of insensitive, hurtful comments that the Commission has declined to find as discriminatory.” Agency Response Brief at 11. The Agency asserts that Complainant’s claims fall short of the severity and pervasiveness required for a hostile work environment. Furthermore, the Agency states that management promptly separated Complainant and S1. Specifically, the Agency states that after Complainant raised the issue of harassment by S1 in late July 2021, S4 separated Complainant and S1 and that Complainant set forth that she had no further contact with S1 after this separation. The Agency further sets forth regarding Complainant raising the matter of alleged harassment by S1 with S2, it “appears” that Complainant only expressed a “lack of support.” Agency Response Brief at 17- 18.
