At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a GS-15, Primary Care Physician, at the Agency’s East Orange Veterans Affairs Medical Center in East Orange, New Jersey. 1. She was denied her repeated request for reasonable accommodation from April 21, 2020, to her termination on January 22, 2021; 2 and 2. She was charged as Absent Without Leave (AWOL) from August 10, 2020, to her termination on January 22, 2021. At the conclusion of the investigation, Complainant requested a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). An investigator noted in the report of investigation that Complainant did not provide an affidavit requested during the investigation of the complaint. 3 The AJ issued a decision without holding a hearing, finding no discrimination. The record indicates that Complainant was appointed as a Primary Care Physician at the Agency on March 3, 2019, subject to a two-year probationary period. As a Primary Care Physician, Complainant’s essential duties included: interviewing and examining patients daily (typically 12), via in-person and virtual; examining patients who were present for face-to-face visits; documenting patient visits in the Agency’s electronic medical record; and ordering consults, labs, and medications using the electronic medical record. Complainant indicated that she sustained a shoulder injury on July 12, 2019. We note that Complainant did not claim that she notified her supervisors or requested a reasonable accommodation at the time of her July 12, 2019 injury. Complainant indicated that in December 2019, she aggravated a prior injury to her right shoulder and notified her supervisors of this December 2019 injury shortly thereafter. Complainant claimed that due to her physical conditions, she was unable to lift her right arm, use a mouse or keyboard, or write, and was therefore unable to perform physical examinations on patients, unable to document notes, or use a computer for more than a few minutes at a time. Regarding claim 1, Complainant’s supervisor (S1) indicated that he became aware of Complainant’s right shoulder condition in December 2019. S1 stated that on February 25, 2020, Complainant made a verbal reasonable accommodation request and submitted Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) requesting no lifting, no prolonged upper extremely fine manipulation with the right arm/hand, part-time, light duties to include 20 hours work week, no grabbing, and assistance with computer tasks as needed. Our records indicate that on August 2, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint, [number removed], regarding her January 22, 2021 termination, recommended by the Professional Standards Board. The Agency issued its final Agency decision finding no discrimination. Complainant appealed the Agency’s decision, and that matter is pending before the Commission, in EEOC [number removed]. The investigator noted that when asked on several occasions, Complainant stated that she sent her affidavit to a “higher authority.” Complainant’s affidavit was not included in the Report of Investigation. Complainant indicates that she sent her affidavit to then Secretary of the Agency, instead. The record indicates that Complainant provided the affidavit to the AJ. After being on leave since December 2019, due to her conditions, Complainant returned to work on March 2, 2020, with the work shift restrictions in place as she requested (i.e., work four hours per day and four hours Leave Without Pay (LWOP), five days per week). She was required to complete the Agency’s Talent Management System training modules online and see two or three patients by the end of the week if needed. Complainant failed to see a patient or complete the required training. A Medical Assistant reported that on March 4, 2020, Complainant declined to see a patient in the waiting room who had already waited several months to see her. Complainant told the Medical Assistant that she could not see the patient because her shoulder was bothering her, and she could barely hold a pen to write notes. On March 5, 2020, S1, Complainant’s second level supervisor (S2), and the Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator initiated an interactive process regarding Complainant’s accommodation request and held a meeting. During the meeting, Complainant made it clear that she could not perform patient examinations of her patients, was unable to complete patient paperwork, and was unable to use a computer for more than a few minutes at a time. Because there was concern even part-time work would worsen her condition, the Agency decided to grant Complainant’s alternative accommodation of continuing LWOP to rehabilitate her injury for a six-week period. Complainant indicated that she remained in an approved LWOP status from March 4, 2020, through August 10, 2020. Two weeks after the meeting, Complainant requested 100% telework. In response, on March 25, 2020, S1 requested Complainant provide physician documentation regarding her ability to perform essential functions of her position including her limitations with typing notes, placing orders including consults, sending out lab letters, and filling out paperwork and forms as requested by her patients. During this time period, due to COVID-19, non-urgent appointments were cancelled, and telework arrangements were made for hospital physicians on ad hoc basis, i.e., 50% telework alternating weeks in-person in the hospital and at-home teleworking. Meanwhile, the Agency prepared dictation software to be installed in Complainant’s computer (to minimize typing); two ergonomic chairs to be delivered to her office for each of her exam rooms; and an ergonomic mouse and keyboard were shipped to her home and a second set was delivered to her office. A laptop was approved on March 3, 2020, but the delivery was delayed due to a shortage of equipment. S1 sent a second laptop request through the Computer/Electronic Accommodation program (CAP), within the Department of Defense, to try to get one sooner but the CAP denied the request because during the “Needs Assessment,” Complainant failed to submit sufficient medical documentation to support the need for a second laptop, as well as a telework agreement. On June 2, 2020, the Agency secured a laptop for Complainant, but she never signed a telework agreement, i.e., addressing teleworking for one to three months due to her temporary disability. S1 indicated that the Agency could not offer Complainant’s requested unconditional 100% telework for at least a year because she failed to provide medical documentation to justify the request. Further, S1 stated that the hospital had a shortage of physicians, some providers were sick with COVID-19, and Complainant’s patients were being covered by other physicians. Thus, the Agency decided to offer Complainant a telework agreement for one to three months, dependent upon updates to her medical documentation. Complainant did not accept the Agency’s telework agreement. The Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator indicated that Complainant made several accommodation requests, including one on April 21, 2020. Complainant requested 100% telework, 20 hours per work week, and modified work assignments for one year to permanent basis. The Coordinator stated, and the record reflects, that she made numerous requests, including several emails in June 2020, to Complainant for medical documentation of her disability in connection with her reasonable accommodation requests. Complainant failed to provide such documentation. Specifically, the Coordinator stated that Complainant was asked to provide medical documentations relating to the effectiveness of telework/telemedicine accommodation with her medical condition and the information relating to the duration of her medical condition, including her consent to contact her physician in order to proceed with her accommodation request. Complainant failed to provide such information. Thus, on August 7, 2020, the Coordinator closed Complainant’s request for reasonable accommodation and informed her that the case would be reopened if she provided the requested documentation. The record reflects that Complainant provided the Agency a copy of her doctor’s (DR1) Return to Work statements. In a Return to Work, dated January 13, 2020, DR1 indicated that Complainant was seen in his office on January 13, 2020, and may return to work after follow-up on February 10, 2020. In a Return to Work, dated February 10, 2020, DR1 indicated that Complainant was seen in his office on February 10, 2020, and may return to work on March 2, 2020. The record also reflects that Complainant provided a doctor’s (DR2) statement dated February 25, 2020. Therein, DR2 stated that Complainant was under DR2’s care for her right shoulder; she should be given light duty and part-time work with no lifting; she should be given assistance with computer tasks; and her return to full duty would be reevaluated in six weeks. In DR2’s statement, dated April 21, 2020, DR2 indicated that Complainant should be allowed to continue in light duty, work from home via laptop, and telemedicine; and her status to return to full duty would be reevaluated on May 19, 2020. In two statements, both dated May 19, 2020, DR2 stated that Complainant was evaluated on May 19, 2020, for right shoulder; she had dexterity issues; she was to continue in physical therapy to oversee shoulder exercises and working from home via telemedicine; she was able to use a computer and mouse with ergonomic support; and her status to return to normal work activities would be reevaluated in six weeks. The record indicates that on July 15, 2020, Complainant submitted DR2’s statement dated June 22, 2020. Therein, DR2 stated that Complainant should be allowed to work from home via telemedicine, maximum 20 hours weekly; she was in pain with dexterity issues; she had issues with gripping and right arm/hand manipulation; she reported pain and issues with gripping the wheel when driving; she would continue with physical therapy to oversee shoulder exercises; she was able to use a computer and mouse with ergonomic support; and her status to resume normal work activities would be reevaluated in six weeks. In a statement dated July 30, 2020, DR2, reiterating the foregoing statement, indicated that he was recommending an evaluation with a back specialist for Complainant’s condition; her status to return would be reevaluated; and her “shoulder symptoms are well controlled and is discharged at this time.” Regarding claim 2, S1 and S2 indicated that after Complainant’s reasonable accommodation case was closed, the Coordinator suggested it was reasonable to charge Complainant AWOL for her absence. Considering the Coordinator’s suggestion and the fact that Complainant had not worked for nearly eight months without providing medical documentation as requested, management decided to place her in AWOL starting August 10, 2020. The Agency stated that Complainant used all her annual and sick leave from December 20, 2019 through February 6, 2020; she was subsequently granted LWOP on February 7 – 29, 2020 (80 hours), March 2 – 26, 2020 (480 hours), and March 26 – August 7, 2020 (421 hours). Complainant indicated that she was in an approved LWOP status from March 4, 2020, through August 10, 2020. Complainant remained in AWOL since August 10, 2020. The AJ found no discrimination as Complainant alleged. Specifically, the AJ stated that Complainant did not establish that the Agency failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation in that she failed to provide medical documentation the Agency requested showing that she was able to perform her position duty, i.e., examining patients physically. The AJ found: Complainant alleges only that she suffered from her inability to use her right arm. She has provided limited documentation to support having any disability, and all the documentation provided stated the treating physician would reassess in weeks to come. Despite repeated requests, Complainant failed to offer any medical documentation of a diagnosis of her condition, or a duration; i.e. whether it was temporary or permanent. She failed to sign a release authorizing the Agency to obtain medical information; and she failed to offer a release authorizing medical information to be disclosed even to the investigator in this case. The AJ further found: Complainant has not shown that she would be able to work from home as, by her own admission, she was unable to use a pen or computer on her own. Additionally, the permanent accommodation requested, telework, is one that Complainant is not qualified for as telework would require an increase in use of the computer. Further, as, part of her responsibilities as a [Primary Care Physician], Complainant is required to examine patients physically even as a telework clinician. Complainant stated she was unable to do so on March 4, 2020[,] and after that never provided any documentation that she was able to examine patients. Complainant refused to engage with the Agency on discussions regarding this issue by failing to provide medical documentation, therefore causing the Agency to close her case without a denial or approval. The Agency did not issue a final order and the AJ’s decision effectively became its final action. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(i). Complainant appeals from the Agency’s final order, contesting its finding of no discrimination. On appeal, Complainant submits numerous documents, including subsequent doctors’ statements.
