At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Library Director, NF-1410-IV, at the Agency’s Joint Base Andrews in Prince George’s County, Maryland. Complainant originally included a claim of reprisal for prior EEO activity in her complaint, but she withdrew the reprisal claim during a conference before the EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). 1. On May 31, 2018, July 3, 2018, and July 16, 2018, Complainant’s first-level supervisor (S1), Force Development Flight Chief, GS-0301-13, claimed to have given a verbal counseling to Complainant; however, no documentation was generated in Complainant’s personnel file; 2. On October 18, 2018, Complainant was given a Letter of Reprimand by S1; 3. On February 12, 2019, March 14, 2019, March 21, 2019, April 2, 2019, and April 3, 2019, S1 accepted incorrect statements from Complainant’s subordinates; 4. On April 25, 2019, Complainant was given a Notice of Proposed Removal letter, signed by S1; 5. On or about June 28, 2019, Complainant was mailed a Decision to Remove letter dated June 28, 2019, signed by S1; and 6. On October 22, 2019, Complainant learned her Common Access Card (CAC) was still active, which would allow others to modify Complainant’s existing work even though Complainant is no longer with the Agency and had to surrender her CAC when removed from federal service. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing. Over Complainant’s objections, the AJ assigned to the case granted the Agency’s motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision by summary judgment in favor of the Agency. The Agency subsequently issued a final order fully implementing the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed. The AJ found that, taking the facts as presented in the report of investigation and viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Complainant, she failed to create a genuine issue of material fact to establish discrimination based on race, sex, color, or age. We note that although the AJ analyzed Claim 6 as part of Complainant’s complaint in the decision granting the Agency’s motion for summary judgment, Complainant does not list the claim in her brief on appeal and does not dispute the AJ’s finding of no discrimination with regard to Claim 6. We will therefore not address this claim further. As to the remaining claims, the AJ found that Complainant could not prove that she had been subjected to disparate treatment or discriminatory harassment. Assuming Complainant could establish a prima facie case of discrimination for Claims 4 and 5, the AJ found that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. The AJ determined that S1 decided to remove Complainant, as stated in the Notice of Proposed Removal letter, because of her “[f]ailure to meet suspenses [i.e., deadlines] in a timely manner,” “cancelling scheduled events without permission from leadership,” “not stagger[ing] schedules to meet the needs of [her] events and patrons,” “not reliev[ing] staff members for lunches or breaks,” not conducting “staff planning meetings for events,” staff accusations that Complainant “gossip[s] and release[s] privileged information about employees with other staff members,” “[s]taff members fear[ing] retaliation, bad feedbacks and appraisals if they speak up,” and “[l]ack of attention to detail with funds management.” Moreover, the AJ found that Complainant was unable to identify similarly situated employees who were treated more favorably than her. Complainant pointed to coworkers who were not disciplined for having a fight in front of patrons, but the AJ found that “Complainant was terminated for an entirely different set of circumstances and reasons” and that “both women [coworkers] hold a different type of position than Complainant,” so were therefore not adequately similar. In analyzing Complainant’s claims of a hostile work environment due to harassment, the AJ concluded that Complainant had not met her burden. Complainant’s harassment claims consisted of the following: S1’s indication in the Notice of Proposed Removal letter that she had given verbal counseling to Complainant on three separate occasions but had not documented it in Complainant’s personnel file 3; S1’s issuance of a Letter of Reprimand to Complainant for “leaving the library unattended to deal with a personal issue, thereby blocking [a summer] intern from the building,”; S1’s acceptance of allegedly inaccurate statements from Complainant’s White subordinates about Complainant’s conduct at work without further investigation; and Complainant’s proposed removal and ultimate termination from the Agency. First, the AJ found that Complainant could not link any of the harassment allegations to her protected bases. Regarding her alleged bases of sex and age, the AJ determined that “Complainant fails to offer any evidence tying her age or sex to any of the listed events other than her own conclusory statements.” As to race and color, the AJ found that Complainant’s statements “speculat[ing] that because Complainant is Black and her supervisor and subordinates are not, there was some kind of conspiracy to get her fired . . . does not, by itself, show racial animus.” The AJ also addressed an affidavit by one of Complainant’s coworkers who supported Complainant’s contention that the work environment was racially hostile. The AJ acknowledged that the coworker averred “that unnamed staff members stated they disliked being supervised by an African American” and that a subordinate coworker and S1 both “complained that Complainant was not experienced enough and that Complainant’s predecessor, who is Caucasian, did a better job.” However, the AJ found the coworker’s affidavit “very confusing,” and noted that “[h]e appears to have learned of these alleged instances second or third-hand, as opposed to witnessing them himself.” Because Complainant provided no other evidence showing these statements had occurred as the coworker alleged, the AJ determined that “the uncorroborated statement of [the coworker], without more, does not establish racial animus on the part of [S1] or Complainant’s subordinates.” In addition to the AJ’s conclusion that Complainant failed to show a nexus between the alleged incidents and her protected bases, the AJ found that “Complainant has failed to establish that she was subjected to severe and pervasive harassment in the form of unwelcome verbal or physical conduct sufficient to change her employment conditions into an abusive working environment.” An Agency employee, Chief Human Resources Officer, GS-0201-12, stated in her affidavit that verbal counseling is not required to be added to personnel files. Rather, the AJ determined that these events were “no more than ordinary tribulations of the workplace which Complainant interpreted as harassing in nature, including disagreements with supervisors, supervisor attempts to manage the office, communication problems, and a supervisor’s implementation of progressive discipline.” The AJ therefore concluded that Complainant had failed to prove beyond a preponderance of the evidence that she was subjected to a hostile work environment.
