At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Counseling Psychologist/Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist at the Agency’s Health Clinic in Baumholder, Germany. a) from September 2014 to the present time, management did not provide Complainant training, she was subjected to derogatory comments, unjustified interrogations and nitpicking her work, negative facial expressions, etc. She felt her authority was undermined and coworkers and other employees were encouraged to circumvent the chain-of-command. Her decisions were overruled making it impossible for her to execute the duties of her position; she felt forced to prove negatives regarding false portrayals and claims made by supervisors and other employees. Agency officials used their influence to disparage and isolate her; and did not reward her for her work. Even though she reported these experiences to her supervisory chain, the Agency has failed to investigate and root out the cause; b) on unspecified dates, other employees rescheduled her clients with other providers. Consequently, when clients requested her by name, they were told they were not allowed to meet with her; c) on October 5, 2016, in a staff meeting, the Captain made decisions about her clients without her input; d) on October 12, 2016, in a meeting with the Lieutenant Colonel 2 and Lieutenant 3, to discuss her request to be removed from the Baumholder Team, Complainant felt she was being attacked, as indicated through their tone of voice, which she considered to be disrespectful; e) on or about November 12, 2016, she was issued a performance evaluation which failed to accurately and truthfully characterize her work performance; f) upon returning to work on December 21, 2016, after being out sick on December 19-20, 2016, two clients were taken from her schedule and redirected to other providers; g) even though there is a shortage of providers in the office due to the holidays, the staff refused to engage her to help cover cases; The Lieutenant Colonel stated in his affidavit that he was the Deputy Chief of Clinical Services and the Chief Nursing Officer. Report of Investigation, Part 1 (ROI1) at 431. For consistency, we will refer to him as how Complainant identified him, as the Lieutenant Colonel. The Lieutenant stated in his affidavit that he was the Commander for Baumholder and Kaiserslautern Clinics. ROI1 at 444. For consistency, we will refer to him as how Complainant identified him, as the Lieutenant. We also note that Complainant referenced another official as the Commander who is a different individual. ROI2 at 96. h) the Non-Commissioned Officer-In-Charge (NCOIC) 4 brought a new staff member down and introduced him to all providers and staff in the office, but did not introduce him to Complainant even though they were talking right outside her office; i) in October 2016, she contacted Regional Health Command-Europe Inspector General (IG) about issues of discrimination and harassment. On December 6, 2016, she was contacted by the Sergeant First Class 5 regarding her complaint of discrimination and reprisal. She informed the Sergeant First Class that Complainant’s legal counsel (Counsel) would be in Germany the week of January 9, 2017, and she would like to coordinate a meeting. She forwarded the email to Counsel who emailed the Sergeant First Class asking about the nature of the meeting, and the Sergeant First Class did not respond, and the meeting did not occur; j) on January 27, 2017, she was given a developmental counseling regarding her temporary reassignment. On November 28, 2014, Complainant filed an Administrative Grievance bringing up many claims included in the present complaint. Report of Investigation, Part 1 (ROI1) at 203. On January 30, 2015, Complainant received a notice of decision stating Complainant was granted her requested remedy (formal mediation to work through her concerns to improve work environment) and the grievance was closed. ROI1 at 209. The Commander for Baumholder, Landstuhl and Kaiserslautern Clinics (Commander) stated that Complainant informed him of her desire to participate in a non-military professional development session regarding suicide and military personnel. The Commander informed her that the Agency could not fund her to do personal research. ROI, Part 2 (ROI2) at 98. He informed Complainant that he could provide her the time, but not pay, to participate. The Commander asserted that he did not deny her training opportunities. Id. In another request, the Lieutenant stated that while he approved of Complainant’s wishes to attend a Suicide Prevention training in Vicenza, Italy, there were no funds to attend, noting also that the training was ultimately cancelled. ROI1 at 447. On September 20, 2016, Complainant sent the Supervisory Psychologist/Chief of Behavioral Health (Chief) an email alleging that the Nurse Practitioner told two of her patients that they The EEO Investigator noted that she contacted NCOIC, but he was reassigned at the time of contact and did not respond. ROI2 at 173. The EEO Investigator noted that she contacted the Sergeant First Class for an interview. The IG Office, including the Sergeant First Class, called the EEO Investigator and stated that internal IG policy is that if the Agency is taking action, then the IG Office abstains from involvement. ROI2 at 173. However, the report generated from the IG investigation is part of the record. ROI1 at 217. were transferring to another provider for treatment, and another patient was told Complainant was no longer working in the clinic and could not see him. ROI1 at 232. The Social Services Assistant noted that Complainant had previously stated that she only worked with Marriage and Family counseling patients, which led to some transfers and limited the patients she could see. ROI2 at 113. The Nurse Practitioner reiterated this. ROI2 at 143. The Lieutenant Colonel stated that he investigated the situation and resolved the matter. ROI2 at 436. For example, he found that in one situation the transfer was unintentional and the client was switched back. Id. On October 5, and 7, 2016, two Interactive Customer Evaluation (ICE) complaints were submitted by two different patients of Complainant’s regarding her standard of care, to the Inspector General (IG). ROI1 at 217. On October 5, 2016, during a standard High-Risk meeting, the Captain discussed concerns regarding two of Complainant’s patients. ROI2 at 6. Immediately following the meeting, Complainant spoke with the Captain. The Captain asserted that Complainant was aggressive, recorded her without her consent, 6 spoke loudly regarding the two patients in an open space and within earshot of other patients. ROI2 at 6. The Captain denied making any changes. ROI2 at 11. Instead, the Captain stated that the meeting was discussing care plan for patients, which occurs with every provider. Complainant spoke to the Lieutenant Colonel informing him that she no longer wanted to be part of the meetings and wanted a reassignment. ROI1 at 437. The Social Services Assistant stated that the High-Risk meetings were so that various providers could coordinate appropriate care. ROI2 at 110. The Social Services Assistant stated that everyone provides their perspective on a patient, but that no one was telling anyone how to do their jobs. Id. On October 12, 2016, the Lieutenant Colonel and Lieutenant met with Complainant to discuss her request to be removed from the Baumholder Team. The Lieutenant Colonel and the Lieutenant noted that Complainant repeatedly alleged that the environment was hostile but when asked for examples, failed to provide any specifics. ROI1 at 437; 448. During the meeting, Complainant asserted that the Lieutenant Colonel and Colonel were hostile to her. ROI1 at 447. Both denied being aggressive, stated that they did not want to continue if she was uncomfortable, and offered to have another neutral party present. ROI1 at 455. On October 13, 2016, Complainant submitted a complaint to the IG office. ROI1 at 219. Complainant alleged that she was subject to discrimination, harassment, and abuse of authority. On or about November 12, 2016, the Lieutenant Colonel issued Complainant a performance evaluation. The evaluation was based on a standard of 15 metrics. ROI1 at 438. The Lieutenant Colonel stated that Complainant received eleven “Exceed” ratings, and four “Met” ratings. Id. The areas that she was marked as “Met”, were areas regarding collaboration with staff. The Lieutenant Colonel noted that he provided Complainant with examples to support his rating. For example, for most of May 2016 through October 31, 2016, he noted that there was no collaboration with staff. ROI1 at 439. Ultimately, Complainant was provided with an overall The IG report dated November 15, 2016, found that Complainant violated German law by unlawfully voice recording the conversation without the other party’s consent. ROI1 at 225. Excellent rating. The Lieutenant, as Complainant’s second-line rater, agreed with the review. ROI1 at 456. On November 15, 2016, the IG issued its report based on the October 5, 7, and 13, 2016 complaints. ROI1 at 217-26. The report concluded that there was no evidence to support Complainant’s allegations of harassment or discrimination. However, Complainant was found to have: created a disruptive environment within the Baumholder Behavioral Health Clinic. The primary recommendation is to move [Complainant] out of the Baumholder Health Clinic due to the contentious nature of her interactions with the rest of the Behavioral Health Staff. Should she remain assigned to the staff, I believe there will continue to be conflict between her and the rest of the team, which demonstrably impacts patient care and significantly decreases moral throughout the clinic. ROI1 at 217. On December 6, 2016, Complainant was contacted by the Sergeant First Class regarding her IG complaint of discrimination and reprisal. She informed the Sergeant First Class that her legal counsel would be in Germany, and she would like to coordinate a meeting. Complainant asserted that the Sergeant First Class responded, but by then her Counsel was no longer in Germany. ROI1 at 400. After returning to work on December 21, 2016, after being out sick on December 19-20, 2016, Complainant alleged that two clients were taken from her schedule and redirected to other providers. The Lieutenant Colonel, the Colonel, and the Chief all attested that they were unaware of any issues on this particular date. The NCOIC brought a new staff member down and introduced him to all providers and staff in the office, but allegedly did not introduce him to Complainant, despite talking outside of her office. Complainant stated that she does not know who this new member is, acknowledged that she did not leave her office to introduce herself, and did not inform the NCOIC, or anyone else, about the matter. ROI1 at 398-99. On January 4, 2017, Complainant was temporarily assigned to the Landstuhl Regional Medical Center (LRMC). ROI1 at 459. On January 27, 2017, she was given a developmental counseling regarding her temporary reassignment. The Chief stated that this was standard counseling and that there was nothing negative about it. ROI1 at 459. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. On October 18, 2021, the Agency submitted a Motion for a Decision Without a Hearing (Motion). Complainant responded to the Motion. On January 31, 2022, the AJ issued his decision. The AJ determined that the investigative record was adequately developed. After making all reasonable inferences in favor of Complainant, he determined that there were no material facts in dispute. Regarding the merits of Complainant’s claim, the AJ determined that the Agency had set forth non-discriminatory reasons for the above detailed actions and that Complainant failed to demonstrate that such reasons were pretext for discrimination. The AJ also determined that Complainant failed to demonstrate that the Agency’s conduct met the severe and pervasive elements needed to sustain a proper unlawful hostile work environment claim. The AJ found that Complainant’s complaint could essentially be characterized by her utter dissatisfaction and personal grievances against her coworkers and management. Ultimately, the AJ granted the Agency’s Motion. When the Agency failed to issue a final action, the AJ’s decision became the Agency's final action by operation of law. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110.
