At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Supervisory Transportation Security Officer, SV-1802-G Band, at the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport in Atlanta, Georgia. On February 2, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to a hostile work environment on the bases of sex (male) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when: 1. on November 24, 2020, a co-worker (CW1) claimed to do Voodoo and placed a flower on Complainant’s body; 2. 3. sometime after November 24, 2020, management failed to address Complainant’s concerns regarding the November 24, 2020, incident with CW1 and prevented Complainant from attending management meetings and scheduling operational meetings; and 4. on December 30, 2020, a manager (Manager) paced back and forth, stood over Complainant, and blocked the door when Complainant tried to leave. 2 In support of his allegations regarding Claims (1) and (2), Complainant alleged that he asked CW1 to step back and stay away from him, but CW1 would not, and that CW1 backed him into a corner. Complainant noted that he complained to Agency management on November 24 and 28, 2020, and that no action was taken. The record indicates that, in a December 21, 2020 memorandum, the Interim Federal Security Director (Interim Director) appointed Manager to investigate Complainant’s claims. Subsequently, and as alleged in Claim (4), Complainant stated that Manager approached him, demanding that Complainant answer questions about his allegations against CW1, but refused to show Complainant his authorization to investigate the claims. Complainant alleged that Manager offered to show the memorandum to Complainant on his computer, but every time Complainant went to look, Manager “would click off the screen to prevent [Complainant’s] view of it. Complainant added that Manager would not allow Complainant to leave without answering questions. Manager denied each of Complainant’s allegations against him, including Complainant’s claim that he was excluded from meetings. On December 31, 2020, Complainant emailed Manager and objected to Manager’s role in investigating Complainant’s claims because Manager was part of Complainant’s management chain. The record contains subsequent emails from Complainant to the Interim Director to similar effect. The Interim Director forwarded Complainant’s concerns to the Federal Security Director (Director). Subsequently, on January 5, 2021, Director appointed another individual, a Transportation Security Inspector (Inspector), to continue the investigation into Complainant’s allegations. Complainant agreed to be interviewed by the Inspector. On January 22, 2021, Inspector issued a fact-finding report in which he could not substantiate Complainant’s claims. Inspector interviewed Complainant, CW1, and several other employees who worked in the same area with both Complainant and CW1. The Inspector acknowledged that Complainant and CW1 had a “contentious conversation” but that the details were in dispute. Complainant alleged that CW1 asked to speak with him privately and backed her into a corner. CW1 responded that Complainant initiated the conversation and questioned CW1 about her relationship with another employee, which upset her. Coworkers confirmed that a conversation took place but could not confirm the substance of the conversation. The Agency initially dismissed the complaint for failure to state a claim, but in Norman S. v. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., EEOC [number removed] (July 22, 2021), the Commission reversed the Agency’s decision and remanded the matter for further processing. In failing to substantiate Complainant’s allegations, the Inspector noted that most of the evidence he discovered was “conjecture.” Complainant testified that he believed the entire sequence of events revealed a discriminatory pattern because CW1 and other women, are not subjected to discipline whereas men are treated more harshly. According to Complainant, “[a] fact finding inquiry was conducted, but this did not address [his] concerns, and did not prevent or lessen the acts of discrimination and retaliation, including subjecting [him] to a hostile work environment.” Complainant criticized the investigation as biased and artificial and suggested that security footage would have corroborated his claims. CW1 provided an affidavit in which she denied Complainant’s version of the events and provided testimony consistent with the statement she provided to the Inspector. The record contains statements from Complainant’s coworkers who states as they did in the investigation. Specifically, they claimed that Complainant and CW1 had a contentious conversation but they could not hear what was said or see what was done. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). In the decision, the Agency found that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The instant appeal followed.
