During the period at issue, Complainant worked for the Agency as a Senior Special Agent, Polygraph Examiner in the Forensic Services Division in Washington, D.C. On January 2, 2020, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint, claiming that the Agency discriminated against him in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity. By letter dated March 11, 2020, the Agency accepted the formal complaint for investigation and determined that it was comprised of the following claims: 1. him as well on his 2019 Merit Promotion Plan (MPP) Supervisory Evaluation (SE) as his prior supervisor had rated him in 2018. 2. Whether Complainant was subjected to a discriminatory hostile work environment based on retaliation/reprisal (prior EEO activity) when: a. On or about September 10, 2019, [S2] obstructed his return to Quality Control (QC) and mentor duties; b. On or about September 13, 2019, [S2] denied his request for reconsideration of the denial of QC and mentor duties. c. Since September 1, 2019, to the present, [S2] and [another Agency official] have delegated assignments directly to the Washington Field Office examiner and excluded him from these communications, circumventing him as the designated Senior Polygraph Examiner/Polygraph Backup. After an investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b), finding no discrimination. Regarding claim (1), the Agency found that it articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s MPP SE. Regarding claims 2(a)-2(b), the Agency asserts that Complainant was restored to mentoring duties. In addition, the Agency stated that Complainant was under consideration for QC duties. Regarding claim 2(c), the Agency stated that S2 asserted that he never consulted with Complainant or any other WFO examiner regarding assignments and that he had not excluded Complainant from communications. The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant requests that we reverse the Agency’s final decision. Complainant states that he submitted his request for a final decision on July 10, 2020 and that the Agency issued an untimely final decision. Complainant requests the sanction of default judgment against the Agency. Complainant states that the Agency’s Report of Investigation (ROI) was inadequate. Complainant asserts his 2019-2020 MPP SE is a continuation of the reprisal to which he has been subjected. Complainant states that three months prior to his MPP SE rating he was rated as “Outstanding” on his annual performance appraisal for 2019-2020. Complainant asserts that less qualified employees are being selected for the collateral duties of mentoring and quality control. Complainant asserts that one management official did not respond to a request to provide testimony. Finally, Complainant asserts that the Agency issued a final decision, in a prior EEO case, which ordered the Agency to reassign Complainant to Quality Control and to provide EEO training to specified management officials, but that it has not done so. In response, the Agency asserts that regarding claim (1), the MPP SE is a separate and distinct process from the annual performance evaluation process. The Agency notes that S2 did not complete Complainant’s 2018-2019 MPP SE. Regarding claims 2(a)-2(b), the Agency asserts that Complainant was given approval to resume mentoring duties. Regarding QC duties, the Agency stated that Complainant remains eligible, but S2 noted that various factors are taken into consideration when selecting an employee for QC duties. Regarding claim 2(c), Agency communication with Complainant, the Agency asserts that Complainant has not been treated differently from other examiners. The Agency asserts that the delay in issuing the final decision was minimal and sanctions are not warranted.
