At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a GS-12 Senior Bankruptcy Specialist with the Agency’s Small Business/Self- Employed Division, Specialty Collection– Insolvency Office in Houston, Texas. On September 17, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her and subjected her to a hostile work environment on the bases of disability (Major Depression, Recurrence, Somatic Symptoms Disorder, Generalized Anxiety, TIA, Myofascial Pain, Acute Stress Disorder) and reprisal (prior protected EEO activity) when: 1. 1.Beginning February 2021 to the present, she has been denied paid leave under the Family Medical and Leave Act (FMLA); 2. On June 19, 2021, a manager reassigned all of a retired co-worker’s complex cases to her; 3. On August 3, 2021, she was denied eight hours of paid FMLA sick leave; 4. On August 24, 2021, her final appeal of a requested reasonable accommodation was denied; and 5. On October 26, 2021, her supervisor denied her official time request to work on her EEO complaint. Claims 1 & 3 – Leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) Complainant challenged leave issues, including her receipt of Absent Without Leave (AWOL) charges and placement in Leave Without Pay (LWOP) status in a prior EEO complaint before an EEOC Administrative Judge. On May 25, 2022, the Administrative Judge in that case found that the Agency had proven that it had placed Complainant in AWOL and LWOP status on various dates in February and March 2021, because Complainant had depleted her available paid leave balances and failed to report to work. In the instant complaint, Complainant again raised leave issues previously adjudicated, including her February and March 2021 receipt of AWOL charges and placement in LWOP status. Complainant also alleges that on August 3, 2021, her manager denied eight hours of paid FMLA sick leave. Complainant’s first-line supervisor (Supervisor1) explained that management’s calculations showed that Complainant had exhausted her paid, available sick leave by March 2021. Specifically, the Agency’s February 26, 2021, letter to Complainant regarding her request for FMLA provided that Complainant had only 32 hours of unpaid FMLA to use between March 1, 2021, and December 3, 2021. As such, on March 1, 2021, and on other dates, Supervisor notified Complainant that she had no paid leave available to use under FMLA. On various dates, including August 3, 2021, Supervisor granted Complainant FMLA-LWOP, rather than paid leave. Complainant did not request an audit of her leave until August 5, 2021. The audit of Complainant’s leave, conducted by a payroll representative, showed that Complainant had some paid leave available to use under FMLA. Accordingly, management retroactively granted Complainant paid leave, including for August 3, 2021. Complainant conceded that she ultimately received all paid leave that she requested and was entitled to receive. Complainant did not identify any similarly situated employees who were treated more favorably regarding leave. Claim 2 – Reassignment of Casework In June 2021, one of Complainant’s GS-12 Bankruptcy Specialist co-workers retired. Complainant claimed that Supervisor emailed Complainant (a GS- 12) and two other GS-12 employees in the group to inform them that the now- retired employee’s cases would be reassigned among the three GS-12s. Complainant asserted that she should not have been reassigned this casework because she had previously submitted a request for reasonable accommodation and believed she should have been on indefinite weather and safety leave. 2 The Administrative Judge found that Complainant was not entitled to indefinite weather and safety leave, and that the Agency had met all its obligations under the Rehabilitation Act. The appeal is currently pending and docketed as EEOC [number removed]. Supervisor explained that she reassigned the cases because it was her job to assign inventory to employees in her group. Supervisor also explained that all reassigned work was appropriate for Complainant’s grade level. Supervisor further explained that the work was split among Complainant and the two other GS-12 Bankruptcy Specialists in the group, based upon the alphabetical order of case names. The documentary record also contains a spreadsheet, provided by Supervisor1, showing the case assignments to Complainant and the two other Bankruptcy Specialists in the group. The record is devoid of similarly situated employees who were treated more favorably regarding this claim. Claim 4 –Reasonable Accommodations On May 6, 2021, Complainant requested the following accommodations: (1) that her manager and/or secretary assistant print and mail her letters; and (2) a reduced workload. On May 18, 2021, Complainant amended her reasonable accommodation request to include reassignment. Complainant concedes that her medical impairment does not limit her ability to perform any essential job duties. The Agency’s Reasonable Accommodations Coordinator met with Complainant on May 21, 2021, to hold an interactive meeting. Regarding her request for reduced workload and/or reassignment, the Agency issued a denial, noting that there was no medical explanation supporting Complainant’s need for such accommodations. The Agency’s denial also noted that lowering Complainant’s caseload would lower performance or production standards and would compromise the Agency’s ability to achieve its mission. Moreover, with an inventory of then only 25 cases, the undisputed record showed that Complainant already maintained a caseload well below other Bankruptcy Specialists and below the number of cases she typically held. 3 Regarding her request for reassignment, the Agency’s denial noted that Complainant was not eligible for reassignment because it is the accommodation of last resort (i.e., granted only when an employee is unable to meet the essential functions of her position). For example, to support a previous 2018 request for reduced inventory, Complainant’s psychologist had noted that Complainant desired a reduced inventory of approximately 38-40 cases. When Complainant requested reassignment as a reasonable accommodation in March 2020, the Agency explained that Complainant failed to submit medical documentation supporting that she was unable to meet the essential functions of her position. Rather, the evidence showed that Complainant wished to be reassigned because she had an unpleasant working relationship with her supervisors, and not because of any medical impairment’s effect on her ability to perform the essential functions of her job. To accommodate Complainant’s physical limitations, in response to Complainant’s May 6, 2021 reasonable accommodation request, the Agency approved Complainant to receive a small portable printer so that she could print and mail letters to taxpayers. While awaiting delivery of the smaller printer, Complainant’s management agreed to send Complainant’s correspondence for her. Before the printer was delivered, Complainant submitted a ticket cancelling the printer because she did not wish to be held accountable for the printer and its paper. Complainant later averred that she would not be able to lift either the smaller printer or its paper. The Agency denied Complainant’s request for reconsideration of her reasonable accommodation denial. On July 12, 2021, Complainant appealed the Agency’s denial of her reconsideration request. On August 24, 2021, the Director of Collection Operations (Director) denied Complainant’s appeal. The denial noted that Complainant had summarily rejected the Agency’s offer to provide her with a smaller portable printer that she could lift. Further, the denial noted that Complainant had an already-reduced workload and was not eligible for reassignment because she was capable of performing the essential functions of her job. Claim 5 – Official Time On October 20, 2021, Complainant requested to use official time from approximately 10:30 a.m. on October 20 through 11:30 a.m. on October 21, 2021, to respond to an EEO Investigator’s request that Complainant complete an affidavit for the instant complaint. Complainant availed herself of six hours of official time on October 20, 2021, and four hours on October 21, 2021. Despite being provided these hours, Complainant did not complete her affidavit and requested additional time on October 25, 2021. On October 25, 2021, Supervisor approved Complainant’s request to use additional official time that day. On October 26, 2021, Complainant emailed the Department of Treasury, Office of Civil Rights and Diversity (OCRD) to request an extension of her deadline to complete her affidavit. In response, OCRD noted that Complainant could request an extension from the investigator if she needed more time to complete the affidavit. After receiving OCRD’s response, Complainant asked Supervisor for official time to complete the affidavit that day. When Supervisor asked Complainant if she had completed the affidavit, Complainant told Supervisor that she had two questions remaining. Because Complainant had already received approximately 18 hours of official time and because OCRD had instructed Complainant to contact the investigator if she needed an extension of her deadline, Supervisor denied Complainant’s request to continue working on her affidavit on official time on October 26, 2021. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC AJ. Complainant timely requested a hearing. The AJ issued a summary judgment decision in favor of the Agency. In the decision, the AJ determined that the alleged incidents were insufficiently severe or pervasive to establish a hostile work environment. Further, the AJ found that there was no evidence demonstrating that the conduct at issue was based on discriminatory or retaliatory animus. For example, Complainant failed to show that similarly situated employees outside of her protected classes were treated more favorably by being granted FMLA or other leave entitlements. Additionally, the record evidence showed that the reassigned cases from the retired, former coworker were split equally amongst Complainant and two of her Bankruptcy Specialists coworkers for unrebutted reasons relative to grade, skill level and appropriateness given Complainant’s low workload. With respect to her denial of reasonable accommodation claim, the AJ determined that in her May 6, 2021 request, Complainant requested that her manager and/or secretary assist her to print and mail her letters and also requested a reduced workload. On May 18, 2021, Complainant amended her request to include reassignment. During the investigation of the instant complaint, Complainant admitted that her impairment did not limit her ability to perform any essential job duties. Moreover, she did not adduce any probative evidence that previously offered accommodations—a post of duty (with telework) away from her manager and communication primarily by email—did not enable the Complainant to perform the essential functions of her position. Further, the AJ found that the record supported the Agency’s denial of Complainant’s request for a reduced inventory. An agency is not required to change production standards, e.g., to lower an employee’s quota for cases. Complainant provided no evidence that she could not adequately perform her assignments given she had an unusually low inventory of only 25 cases. Finally, the AJ concluded that the undisputed record showed, after an interactive meeting, the Agency approved Complainant for a lightweight, portable printer. While awaiting delivery of the smaller printer, Complainant’s management agreed to send Complainant’s correspondence for her. However, before the printer was delivered, Complainant submitted a ticket requesting cancellation of the printer delivery, stating that she did not wish to be held accountable for the printer and its paper. Management continued to print and mail her letters. As a result, the AJ found that the Agency did not deny Complainant reasonable accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. Finally, the AJ found that the Agency’s grant of 18 hours of official time was objectively reasonable for Complainant to complete her affidavit despite the investigators’ numerous questions. The record showed that Complainant’s time was spent including information and documentation she previously provided in previous complaints. The Agency was entitled to limit the Complainant’s use of official time to 18 hours to complete her affidavit for this complaint and to have her seek additional time from the investigator. Accordingly, the AJ concluded that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination, reprisal, or a hostile work environment as alleged. The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.
