At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Travel Specialist, GS-6, at the Agency’s Office of Infectious Disease (OID), National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB Prevention (NCHHSTP) in Atlanta, Georgia. Report of Investigation (ROI), at 49. 2 The Supervisor Program Specialist, GS-12, (female, African American) was assigned as Complainant’s first-level supervisor (S1). Complainant was also supervised by the Management Officer (male, Caucasian) and the Deputy Director (male). Page numbers refer to the Bates page numbers appearing at the bottom center of each page of the ROI. According to Complainant, on October 28, 2013, in a meeting, S1 told her to get out of the Agency because upper management did not like her, the Management Officer was out to get her, and that she needed to get out of the “god damn” Union because it was never going to allow her to go anywhere in her career. ROI at 127. S1 denied making the comments and denied that the meeting or incident ever took place. Also, according to Complainant, the Support Specialist asked why she was not attending the Christmas party and asked if she celebrated Christmas. Id. at 129-30. Complainant apparently replied that she is a Jehovah’s Witness and does not celebrate Christmas. Id. Complainant averred that the Support Specialist “looked at her as if she had a disease” and rolled her eyes. Id. The Support Specialist did not recall having any interaction with Complainant on the day in question and maintained that the incident did not occur as Complainant alleged. Complainant additionally averred that on January 9, 2014, she overheard a coworker (C1) make the comment to another coworker (C2) that she (Complainant) thinks “she is cute because she is built like a Black girl" and that she (Complainant) "is bad news and not your friend." Id. at 131- 32. Complainant maintained that such comments were made about her multiple times in hallways and in the elevator. Id. But C1 maintained that she had no idea who Complainant was and that she did not make any such comment. C2 similarly averred that she did not recall the comment being made to her by C1. Complainant further attested that the Deputy Director sexually harassed her on multiple occasions, which continued to the present. Complainant stated that the Deputy Director would stare at her chest, and he also put his hand on her left leg and “rolled his hand down” during two separate staff meetings. Id. at 133-35. Complainant said that she simply “scooted over” when the Deputy Director first put his hand on her leg. Id. She said that when this occurred a second time, she left in the middle of the meeting. Id. Complainant added that she told the Deputy Director to stop because the touching of her leg during the meeting was making her feel uncomfortable. Id. Complainant averred that the Deputy Director would also often come into her cubicle and put his hands on her shoulders, as if he were massaging her. Id. Complainant further stated that the Deputy Director would lean over her while showing her something on her computer, invading her personal space. Id. Complainant stated that the Deputy Director also asked her to lunch and/or dinner, but she rebuffed his advances. Id. Complainant attested that the Deputy Director punished her for rebuffing him by assigning her extra duties, refusing her requests for training, assigning her duties outside of her position description, and yelling and cursing at her in his office regarding the processing of employees travel preparations. Id. at 53. Complainant also attested that the Deputy Director would often call her into his office and “vent in a loud, angry voice while throwing things such as pens and pencils across the room.” Id. at 154. Complainant explained that she discussed the Deputy Director’s behavior with several of her coworkers. Complainant further explained that she reported the Deputy Director’s behavior just a few weeks after it first occurred to the Director, who simply shook his head in disbelief. Id. at 134. Complainant maintained that nothing was done to resolve the situation, and so the harassment continued. Id. Complainant stated that she further reported the Deputy Director’s harassment to S1, the Management Officer, and a Consultant with the Agency. Id. According to Complainant, these management officials ignored her complaints about the Deputy Director’s harassment towards her. Id. Nevertheless, both S1 and the Management Officer denied that Complainant ever reported the Deputy Director’s behavior to them, and so they were unaware of the Deputy Director’s alleged harassment. However, several of Complainant’s coworkers averred that Complainant had confided in them that the Deputy Director had been subjecting her to sexual harassment. The Senior Budget Analyst specifically attested that Complainant would come into her office, almost on a weekly basis, to vent about the Deputy Director violating her personal space and making her feel uncomfortable by asking her out and making inappropriate comments. Id. at 208. The Senior Budget Analyst said that she had witnessed the Deputy Director throw tantrums and yell as if Complainant was his “soundboard” on a few occasions. Id. The Senior Budget Analyst further averred that Complainant visited her office on several occasions crying over the Deputy Director’s behavior towards her. Id. The Team Lead similarly attested that Complainant also came to him on occasions to talk about the Deputy Director’s inappropriate behavior and that the Deputy Director had touched her inappropriately during a meeting. Id. at 205. The Team Lead averred that Complainant explained to him that she had scheduled a meeting with the Management Officer to discuss the Deputy Director’s conduct, and that Complainant later discussed the Management Officer’s lack of concern for addressing the alleged harassment. Id. The Team Lead added that he told Complainant that it seemed as if nothing would come as a result of her meeting with the Management Officer. Id. The Resource Management Team Lead also explained that she was frequently a “comforting ear” for Complainant, and that Complainant expressed her extreme discomfort with the Deputy Director’s behavior. Id. at 223. The Resource Management Team Lead stated that she had seen the Deputy Director in Complainant’s office many times, but she had not witnessed anything more than what she perceived to be an encroachment of Complainant’s personal space. Id. She mentioned she felt this to be unusual, but she had never directly witnessed the Deputy Director touch or address Complainant inappropriately. Id. The Public Health Advisor Supervisor likewise maintained that Complainant had mentioned that the Deputy Director had touched her leg and asked her out to dinner. Id. at 199. The Public Health Advisor attested that the Deputy Director had harassed her in the past as well, but she did not complain because she would have been the first women to have come forward. Id. The Public Health Advisor said that she was afraid to come forward because the Deputy Director was highly regarded within the Agency. Id. Another Team Lead, and two more employees, similarly stated that Complainant had mentioned that the Deputy Director had been harassing her. Complainant claimed, moreover, that S1 improperly scored her with the unsatisfactory rating of 2. for her mid-year performance review and placed her on a Performance Assistance Plan (PAP). Id. at 157-58. Complainant believed that S1’s review of her performance was especially improper because S1 would reportedly make comments to her, such as “Stop trying to act Black,” “Are you sure you’re not Black?” and “Don’t worry, we all know you’re Black.” Id. at 139. In the PAP issued to Complainant dated May 4, 2014, S1 noted that Complainant had failed to respond to customers concerning their travel tickets in a timely manner and failed to edit documentation to ensure the accuracy and completeness of travel reports, among other things. Id. at 335-40. Complainant was then subsequently placed on a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) by S1 on September 22, 2014. Id. at 341-44. Therein, S1 noted that Complainant was rated, “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results" for her Customer Service rating. Id. S1 specifically noted that Complainant did not document and resolve complaints without assistance from her peers. Id. S1 further wrote that Complainant did not complete tasks in a timely manner and did not keep her customers up to date on their travel. Id. S1 also wrote, in the PIP, that Complainant received more than three customer complaints and a complaint from the Senior Federal Agency Travel Administrator (FATA). Id. S1 noted, for example, that the Senior FATA asked Complainant to correct a travel voucher for an employee, but Complainant required constant assistance from her peers to complete this task. Id. On October 16, 2014, Complainant received a Counseling Memorandum from S1. Id. at 345- 346. In the Memorandum, S1 noted that when she presented Complainant with the PIP on September 25, 2014, Complainant spoke in a loud and rude tone during the entire meeting. Id. S1 wrote that Complainant engaged in verbal abuse during the meeting, was not able to control her temper, and said she was being retaliated against, among other things. Id. S1 additionally noted that Complainant complained that she (S1) had been allowing her peers to call her a “wigger,” which meant “white [N-word].” Id. The Support Services Specialist observed, however, that Complainant was under extreme distress due to S1’s behavior towards Complainant. Id. at 202. The Support Services Specialist explained that one day she was in the copy room and Complainant came in shaking and she thought she would have to call an ambulance for Complainant. Id. According to the Support Services Specialist, Complainant proceeded to discuss the harassment she was experiencing from S1 and how often it was occurring. Id. Complainant additionally stated that on December 12, 2014, she was informed that was going to be transferred to another team away from S1’s supervision, so she could get a new start. Id. at 146-47. Complainant maintained that the transfer was good for her, as she noticed a more positive working environment. Id. Nevertheless, Complainant subsequently received her end-of- the year performance evaluation with the unsatisfactory rating of 2. from S1. Id. at 148-49. On April 8, 2014, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her and subjected her to harassment on the bases of race (Caucasian), national origin (German, Persian), sex (female), religion (Jehovah’s Witness, Jewish), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity when: 1. On October 28, 2013, S1 told her to get out of the Agency because management do not like her, the Management Officer is out to get her, and she needs to get out of the god damn union because if she does not she is never going to go anywhere in her career. 2. On December 12, 2013, the Business Services Support Specialist approached her and berated her for not attending the office Christmas party. 3. On January 9, 2014, she overheard a coworker comment to another coworker about her that she "thinks she is cute because she is built like a Black girl" and that she (Complainant) "is bad news and not your friend." 4. She has been subjected to sexual harassment by the Deputy Director from 2006 and continuing when he made unwanted advances toward her. The Deputy Director punished her for rebuffing him by assigning her extra duties, refusing her requests for training, assigning her duties which are outside of her position description, and yelling and cursing at her in his office regarding the processing of employees travel preparations. 5. On January 13, 2014, S1 told her to get the hell out of my office when she tried to explain to S1 that she had not been trained on the proper procedures for processing travel, among other things. 6. On July 28, 2014, she was given an unsatisfactory mid-year performance review with a rating of 2.06. 7. On May 5, 2014, she was placed on a Performance Assistance Plan (PAP). 8. On September 22, 2014, she was placed on a Performance Improvement Plan (PIP). 9. On October 16, 2014, she was issued a Counseling Memorandum. 10. On December 12, 2014, she was advised that her supervisor would change from S1 to another supervisor on another team. 11. On January 29, 2015, she received a 2. on her end of year performance evaluation Following the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). In accordance with Complainant's request, the Agency issued a final decision (FAD) pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. The Agency specifically found that Complainant did not establish that her allegations occurred as she alleged with regard to claims 1-3, and 5. In so finding, the Agency noted that there was no evidence to corroborate Complainant’s version of events with regard to her allegations that S1 subjected her to a hostile work environment. The Agency determined, moreover, that Complainant’s allegations were not severe or pervasive enough to establish a hostile work environment. The Agency also found that Complainant did not establish that she was subjected to sexual harassment with regard to claim 4. The Agency noted that several witnesses reported that Complainant was so devastated by the Deputy Director’s harassing behavior that she frequently vented about his conduct and was seen crying and shaking in their offices. But the Agency noted that no witnesses specifically observed the sexual harassment even though Complainant asserted that the events occurred in the workplace. The Agency further noted that while some witnesses described the Deputy Director as becoming angry and even throwing things, there was insufficient evidence to show that the Deputy Director sexually harassed Complainant. The Agency further found that management articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions regarding claims 6-11, and that Complainant did not establish that its reasons were pretextual based on her protected classes. The Agency determined that Complainant did not show that it was motivated by discriminatory animus based on her protected classes, and therefore Complainant did not establish that she was subjected to disparate treatment as alleged.
