At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Customs and Border Protection Officer (CBPO) at the Agency’s San Ysidro Port of Entry in San Ysidro, California. age (YOB: 1954), and reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 when: 1. Beginning May 31, 2018 and continuing, Complainant was subjected to harassment as evidenced by the following: a. On May 31, 2018, the Branch Chief refused to rescind a Memorandum of Counseling regarding Treasury Enforcement Communication System (TECS) that Complainant received; b. From February 2019 to June 2019, the Branch Chief was aware that the Supervisory CBP Officer (SCBPO-1) bullied and harassed Complainant yet took no corrective actions; c. On April 17, 2019, SCBPO-1 verbally reprimanded Complainant for missing a morning training class; d. In June 2019, SCBPO-1 showed a knife to Complainant and another CBPO (CBPO-2) and informed them that he brings his knife collection to work in his backpack; e. On June 3, 2019, SCBPO-1 reprimanded Complainant by email regarding his Treasury Enforcement Communication System (TECS) access expiring f. On June 19, 2019, SCBPO-1 changed Complainant’s schedule from 2:00 p.m. to 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. in order to celebrate the Chief’s birthday, and solicited $20 from him for the birthday party; g. On or around August 16, 2019, SCBPO-1 and another SCBPO (SCBPO-2) informed Complainant’s coworkers that he would be reassigned and leaving the Intelligence Targeting Unit effective September 1, 2019, although Complainant was not reassigned at that time; h. On or around August 16, 2019, SCBPO-1 and SCBPO-2 informed Complainant that his request for leave during the month of September 2019 would not be approved; however, after Complainant questioned them about the matter, his leave was ultimately approved; 2. Effective March 8, 2020, Complainant was removed from his detail in the Intelligence Targeting Unit (ITU). 2 The Branch Chief stated that she requested that Complainant by issued the Memorandum of Counseling after he was twice instructed not to put the terms “E/O if not in vehicle” on a TECS record as it creates a violation and Complainant continued not to comply. See Report of The Agency dismissed two claims, specifically that on December 23, 2018, Complainant learned he had not received a year-end monetary award and that on April 21, 2019, the SCBPO-1 charged Complainant with 1. hours of Leave Without Pay for untimely counselor contact. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 150-57. The Agency also dismissed three claims alleging that the SCBPO-1 was unprofessional in speaking ill about three coworkers for failure to state a claim as Complainant did not show that he was aggrieved by comments made about other employees. See ROI at 150-57. Investigation (ROI) at 205. 3 The Intelligence Division Chief (CID Chief) explained that Complainant requested CBPOs to “exempt” travelers on primary which had illegal activity links/ties or which he targeted for illegal activity, which was essentially asking CBPOs to violate TECS policy and he approved the issuance of the Memorandum of Counseling due to Complainant’s failure to follow instructions even after being asked twice to do so. See ROI at 259. The SCBPO-1 explained that the TECS system sends automated periodic reminders when a user is required to recertify in order to maintain their access from 30 days prior to the due date of recertification. See ROI at 223-24. The SCBPO-1 stated that he received an automated email from the TECS system informing him that Complainant had lost his access and he sent Complainant an email counseling him on the loss of access and reminding Complainant that he was required to maintain TECS access. See ROI at 223-24. The SCBPO-1 explained that the ITU had a tradition of organizing “potlucks” or obtaining catering for the group for certain situations and that such events are announced as optional participation. See ROI at 224. The SCBPO-1 stated that he told the ITU employees that the potluck would be held at 1:00 p.m. and that the 2:00 p.m. shift was told they could come in an hour early in order to participate. See ROI at 224. He further explained that each employee was asked to donate $10 if they wished to and that CBPO-1 gave him $20 to pay for both himself and Complainant after Complainant verbally told him that he wished to participate. See ROI at 224. The CID Chief stated that he removed Complainant from his detail due to Complainant’s failure to perform his basic duties as a ITU officer, explaining that the Watch Commander specifically asked contacted Complainant to request assistance on a particular case and requested an expeditious response but Complainant failed to perform the task and also delegated the task to other members of the Tactical Terrorism Response Team. See ROI at 260. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but subsequently withdrew his request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision found that Complainant did not establish a prima facie case because there was no evidence that other employees who were not members of his protected classes were treated differently but even so, that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions and Complainant did not submit any evidence of discriminatory animus. We note that the investigator gave Complainant two weeks to submit his affidavit and Complainant responded by requesting two weeks of administrative or sick leave to complete his affidavit. See ROI at 198. On September 28, 2020, the day before Complainant’s affidavit was originally due, the investigator provided Complainant an extension to complete his affidavit and Complainant was advised that he was approved for 16 hours of administrative leave for September 23-24, 2020. See ROI at 198. Complainant did not submit an affidavit. The decision further found that Complainant did not establish that any of the alleged incidents of harassment were due to his protected classes. The decision therefore concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. Complainant appealed. On appeal, Complainant contends that the investigation was inadequate and requests that his case be referred to an AJ for additional investigation, as well as contending that the Agency’s reasons are untrue. In response, the Agency contends that Complainant was given adequate time to submit his affidavit but failed to do so and also failed to submit any evidence supporting his assertions of discriminatory animus. 4
