At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a GS-0343-13 Management Analyst in the Agency’s Acquisitions Policy Oversight and Business Strategies Division, Office of the Senior Procurement Executive (OSPE), Office of the Secretary (OST) in Washington, D.C. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 210-16. Complainant filed a prior EEO complaint in 2016, and she alleged that she has been subjected to ongoing retaliation since filing her complaint. ROI at 112. Complainant alleged that, although the Agency completed a desk audit of her position in 2016 and determined that her position was properly graded at the GS-13 level, there were inaccuracies in her position description under the “Scope and Effect” and “Supervisory Controls” sections. ROI at 115, 218-28. Complainant stated that she repeatedly raised these inaccuracies with management beginning in February 2017, to no avail. ROI at 115. The OSPE Deputy Director (DD-1) stated that she met with Complainant on February 6, 2017, as Complainant was preparing to return to OSPE from a detail. ROI at 139. According to DD-1, after Complainant asked her to look at inaccuracies in her position description, she reviewed Complainant’s position description with Human Resources and determined that the position description accurately reflected the responsibilities and duties of Complainant’s position. ROI at 139. Complainant averred that neither DD-1 nor the Associate Director of the Acquisition Policy Oversight and Business Strategies Division (AD), Complainant’s new supervisor as of June 2018, knew her actual job duties because they were new to OSPE and, therefore, were not qualified to assess her position description. ROI at 127. According to Complainant, the M-60 shared drive is a shared drive for employees and contractors to archive non-personnel-related work documentation. ROI at 116. Complainant stated that in June 2017, she noticed that a coworker (Coworker) had saved her investigative affidavit for Complainant’s prior EEO complaint to the M-60 shared drive. ROI at 116. Complainant alleged that the affidavit was posted on the shared drive to harm her reputation by making it visible to everyone in the office. ROI at 116. Complainant averred that she took a screenshot of the affidavit, deleted the affidavit from the shared drive, and reported it to DD-1. DD-1 stated that Coworker inadvertently saved a copy of the affidavit to the shared drive and that she directed Coworker to delete it from the shared drive immediately after it was brought to her attention. ROI at 139-40. Coworker averred that she accidentally saved a copy of her affidavit for Complainant’s EEO complaint to the M-61 shared drive. 2 ROI at 538. According to Coworker, she meant to save it to her personal “H” drive and did not realize she had saved it to the shared “S” drive until DD-1 brought the matter to her attention. ROI at 538. Complainant alleged that DD-1 should have disciplined Coworker. ROI at 127. Complainant stated that she told AD several times that she needed to speak with her attorney before she could provide information about the Digital IT Acquisition Program. ROI at 117. According to Complainant, this was because the Digital IT Acquisition Program was related to her prior EEO complaint. ROI at 117. Complainant averred that on June 29, 2018, AD met with her to discuss the matter, and AD questioned Complainant as though it was an interrogation. ROI at 117. Complainant stated that she left AD’s office and returned to her cubicle, only to receive another email from AD within minutes. ROI at 117. Complainant alleged that, when she went to AD’s doorway to ask why she was doing this, AD responded that Complainant believed everyone was out to get her. ROI at 117. AD stated that Complainant had indicated that she was unable to complete a work assignment because her attorney had advised her not to respond. Coworker stated that she does not have access to the M-60 shared drive and that she accidentally saved the affidavit to the M-61 shared drive. ROI at 538. However, Complainant provided a screenshot that shows the affidavit on the M-60 shared drive. ROI at 64. ROI at 163, 172. According to AD, when she asked Complainant why she could not complete the assignment during the June 29, 2018, meeting, Complainant told her that she had a pending EEO complaint related to the topic of the assignment. ROI at 163. AD averred that, during the meeting, Complainant had stated that she had not enjoyed working for her previous supervisors, as she thought they had treated her unfairly. ROI at 165. AD stated that she told Complainant that she had no intention of treating her unfairly, but she said it was a reference to Complainant’s perceived unfair treatment in the office. ROI at 165. AD denied telling Complainant that she thought everyone was out to get her. ROI at 165. Complainant alleged that she was micromanaged and overmanaged and that she faced telework restrictions. ROI at 117-18, 128-29. For example, Complainant stated that, in September 2018, DD-1 and AD requested additional documentation for managerial approvals for the Warrior to DOT Contracting Intern Program (W2DOT Program) and subsequently did not respond to Complainant’s emails requesting approval for W2DOT Program initiatives. ROI at 121-22, 128- 29. Regarding telework, Complainant averred that the new telework policy was more restrictive for employees with “ad hoc” telework agreements, as employees were only allowed to telework one day per week with supervisory notification and consideration of extenuating circumstances. ROI at 117-18. DD-1 stated that, although she asked Complainant multiple times to produce a consolidated program/project schedule for the W2DOT Program, Complainant complained that she was being micromanaged never produced an adequate program/project schedule. ROI at 140. According to DD-1, Complainant was on a “very liberal ad hoc telework schedule,” generally arriving at the office around 8:30 or 9:00, leaving the office at 3:00, and teleworking the remainder of the day. ROI at 141. DD-1 averred that she did not place any restrictions on Complainant’s telework even after implementing the OSPE Timekeeping and Telework Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on July 1, 2018. ROI at 140-41. AD stated that Complainant’s telework schedule was “grandfathered” in since it predated the new SOP. ROI at 165-66. According to Complainant, she is the Agency’s acquisition workforce program manager and is responsible for Agency system administrative support, Agency system configurations, controls, workflows, and all aspects of Agency user interface issues and technical support. ROI at 118. Complainant alleged that, although she completed all of the required training for the Federal Acquisition Certification for Program and Project Managers Information Technology Core-Plus Specialization (FAC-P/PM-IT) certification, AD denied her application for certification without explaining what was missing from the application. ROI at 118-19. Complainant averred that she is responsible for approving bureau-level FAC-P/PM-IT certification applications before they are submitted to the IT Office for approval. ROI at 119. AD and DD-1 stated that Complainant is not required or expected to have FAC-P/PM-IT certification for her position. ROI at 142, 166-67. AD averred that Agency policy is that this specialized certification is primarily for those primarily responsible for acquisition of IT investments and that Complainant is neither responsible for such IT investments in her position, nor did her application document the minimum two years of experience. ROI at 166-68, 403-10. Complainant averred that AD marginalizes her work and stated that AD is incorrect that Complainant’s position is not inherently an IT position. ROI at 130. Complainant stated that she requested to be reassigned to a supervisor outside of the chain of command of DD-1 and AD but that her request was denied. ROI at 119-20. Complainant averred that she also requested a detail assignment to the Assistant Secretary for Administration (M) during the summer of 2018 but DD-1 denied the request because of inadequate resources to fulfill Complainants duties. ROI at 120-21. DD-1 stated that Complainant asked to directly report to DD-1’s supervisor, the Senior Procurement Executive (SPE), but SPE denied her request. ROI at 143, 492. According to DD-1, Complainant proposed two alternative supervisors, but, on August 7, 2018, DD-1 told Complainant that neither supervisor was a logical option because of Complainant’s duties and urged her to improve her working relationship with AD, noting AD had only been her supervisor for approximately one month. ROI at 142-44, 147-49, 472-92. Complainant stated that DD-1 should not have been in charge of her request for a new supervisor, since Complainant had requested reassignment away from DD-1’s chain of command. ROI at 131. Complainant averred that she was invited to speak on a panel on Agile initiatives by a coach, but that AD marginalized the event and would not allow Complainant to speak on the panel. ROI at 121, 131-32, 498-506. AD stated that she denied Complainant’s request to speak on the panel because OSPE had not done much in terms of adopting Agile practices beyond hosting a few limited-scope events. ROI at 169-70, ROI at 501-06. According to AD, she told Complainant she could participate as an audience member. ROI at 170. DD-1 averred that the panel was organized by a contractor to discuss changes for federal employees as various agencies adopted Agile Unleashed. ROI at 144-45. According to DD-1, because OSPE had not implemented any Agile initiatives outside of technology, Complainant did not have any Agency-specific knowledge to contribute. ROI at 144-45. Complainant initiated contact with an EEO counselor on July 19, 2018. On October 2, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the basis of reprisal for prior protected EEO activity under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (prior EEO complaint) when: 1. In or around February 2017, DD-1 refused to discuss inaccuracies or corrections regarding her position description; 2. In or around June 2017, an affidavit from Complainant’s prior EEO complaint was posted on the shared drive; 3. On June 29, 2018, AD referenced Complainant’s prior EEO complaint, stating, “you think everyone is out to get you”; 4. During July 2018, management subjected her to excessive micromanagement, over- management, and telework restrictions; 5. On July 8, 2018, AD did not approve her FAC-P/PM-IT certification application; 6. In July 2018 or August 2018, her request for a supervisory reassignment was denied; instead, she was detailed to M and assigned the execution of program and project management efforts for M-60; 3 During the investigation, Complainant clarified that she was not detailed to M. ROI at 120-21. 7. In or around September 2018, her request to participate in the Agile panel was denied. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing but subsequently withdrew her request. Consequently, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The Agency concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged. On appeal, Complainant contends that the investigative record is incomplete and that the Agency should be sanctioned for its inadequacy. She also provides new evidence in support of her appeal. Complainant further argues that she established both a prima facie case of reprisal and that the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons were pretextual. Complainant requests that the Commission find in her favor and allow her to submit evidence of her damages. In opposition to Complainant’s appeal, the Agency contends that the record is not incomplete and that it is inappropriate for Complainant to argue on appeal that the record is incomplete because she failed to submit documents requested by the EEO investigator, failed to notify the Agency of any perceived deficiencies after reviewing the investigative record, and withdrew her hearing request the day before the start of discovery. The Agency suggests that the evidence provided by Complainant in support of her appeal was reasonably available during the investigation and should not be considered. The Agency requests that the Commission affirm its final decision.
