At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Mail Handler at the Agency’s Incoming Mail Processing & Distribution Center in Linthicum, Maryland. September 4, 2015, for improper conduct, violation of the zero-tolerance policy, and violation of the joint statement on violence and behavior in the workplace. The Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. The investigative record reflects the following pertinent matters. On August 19, 2015, after a meeting with mail handlers about mistaken labels on containers held by Complainant’s first-line supervisor (Supervisor) and second-line supervisor (Manager), Complainant called Manager “sorry” and/or “a sorry ass.” Report of Investigation (ROI) at 19- 24, 78, 85, 89-90. Complainant did not immediately leave the work floor when Manager instructed him to do so. ROI at 21, 78. After Manager threatened to call the police, Complainant walked with Supervisor to the conference room. ROI at 78. Once there, Complainant said, in reference to Manager, “He’s a Bitch! He’s a Bitch!”. ROI at 78-79, 84, 90. On the way to the work floor to retrieve his things, Complainant yelled, “Manager is a Bitch—Bitch Ass!”. ROI at 79, 84, 90. Complainant next punched a hole in the wall and said, “[Manager] is a Bitch—Fuck Him!”, as he was escorted out of the building. ROI at 80, 90. Complainant stated that he instead said, “This is bullshit,” on the way to the conference room with Supervisor. ROI at 23. He did not remember exactly what he said to himself while he was being escorted out of the building but acknowledged taking “a swipe” at a wall. ROI at 23-24. As a result of the confrontation, management placed Complainant on Emergency Placement status. Id. Complainant attended a Pre-Disciplinary Interview on August 24, 2015, with his union representative, Supervisor, and another supervisor (Supervisor 2) to discuss what happened on August 19, 2015. ROI at 25, 79. At that meeting, Supervisor explained that the Agency would be recommending his removal. ROI at 79. On August 31, 2015, Supervisor recommended removing Complainant to the Labor Manager. ROI at 83-86. Supervisor issued the removal notice because Complainant had used profanity, failed to follow instructions, and punched a hole in a wall. She also noted that Complainant had received prior discipline, including a 10-day suspension for Failure of Obedience to Orders and a 14-day suspension for a violation of the Workplace Violence Zero Tolerance Policy. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. When Complainant did not object, the AJ assigned to the case granted the Agency’s April 24, 2017, motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision without a hearing on August 21, 2020. The AJ found that the Agency had legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for Complainant’s termination. She found the Agency’s actions were based on Complainant’s confrontational, disrespectful, and violent conduct in the workplace which violated the Agency’s Zero Tolerance Policy. Furthermore, the AJ concluded, Complainant had not proffered any evidence to counter the Agency’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons to suggest his race and/or gender played any role in the Agency’s decision to terminate him. As to Complainant’s assertion that he was discriminated against based on his size, in violation of GINA, the AJ found that Complainant cannot establish a prima facie case of genetic information discrimination because he failed to show that he is entitled to protection under the statute, that he suffered an adverse employment action, and that the adverse employment action presents an inference of discrimination on the basis of his genetic information. After viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Complainant, the AJ held that he did not prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was discriminated against on the basis of race, gender, or genetic information, when he was issued a Notice of Removal on September 11, 2015. The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged.
