At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Carrier Technician at the Agency’s Garland-South Station in Garland, Texas. On April 17, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her on the basis of disability (physical- neck and shoulder) when: 1. Beginning on or about November 7, 2020 and ongoing, she was continually harassed (questioned) about her work restrictions and not provided work assistance; 2. Beginning on or about November 9, 2020, and continuing, she was required to do the walking portion of her route; 3. On December 23, 2020, she was yelled at and embarrassed in front of her coworkers; 4. On December 23, 2020, she was required to submit a new CA-17 and not paid for the time she missed from work to get the CA-17 completed; 5. On December 23, 2020, she was moved off Route 74 and required to case and carry Route 23; 6. On February 1, 2021, she was called to the supervisor’s desk to discuss her medical documents; 7. On March 23, 2021, she was harassed and referred to the District Reasonable Accommodation Committee (DRAC); 8. On April 2, 2021, her request for leave was not granted and she was charged Absent Without Leave (AWOL); and 9. On or about April 15, 2021, management gave her a modified assignment which changed her start time to 10:00 am and did not provide her with a mail cart. 2 The Agency dismissed a claim alleging that Complainant was attacked by a dog while on the job and not properly compensated for the time missed pursuant to 29 C.F.R. §1614.107(a)(1) as a collateral attack on the Office of Workers’ Compensation (OWCP), which has jurisdiction over issues of compensation for work-related injuries. See Report of Investigation (ROI) at 71-75. We affirm the dismissal as the Commission has repeatedly stated that a complainant cannot use the EEO process to challenge actions which occurred during the OWCP adjudicatory process. See Janiece H. v. U.S. Postal Serv., EEOC [number removed] (Jan. 8, 2016). The gravamen of Complainant’s claims amount to an allegation of a violation of the Rehabilitation Act because the Manager of Customer Service (Manager) subjected her to harassment based on her disability and forced her to work outside of her medical restrictions. Specifically, Complainant argues that the Manager marked her AWOL even though she had submitted a leave request which had been previously approved by the Supervisor of Customer Service (Supervisor), and that the Agency denied her a mail cart to help her with her duties. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing, but the AJ denied the hearing request as a sanction for Complainant’s failure to submit the required Preliminary Case Information and her failure to respond to the AJ’s Order to Show Cause. The AJ remanded the complaint to the Agency, and the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged.
