At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a Level 1 City Carrier at the Agency’s Meadow Mesa Station facility in North Las Vegas, Nevada. On February 25, 2023, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him and subjected him to harassment on the basis of age (born 1973) when: 1. On August 30, 2022, Complainant was put on Emergency Placement. 2. On September 14, 2022, Complainant was suspended. 3. On September 20, 2022, one of Complainant’s supervisors followed him to the bathroom, yelled at him to get back to work, and threatened him with discipline. 4. On September 24, 2022, one of Complainant’s supervisors accused him of not fastening his seatbelt before starting the engine. 5. On November 1, 2022, Complainant was escorted out of the facility. The Agency accepted these claims and conducted an investigation which produced the following evidence. Claim 1 In his investigative affidavit, Complainant stated that on August 30, 2022, he asked one of his supervisors, S1, to sign or initial his copy of a request for Union time. Complainant stated that S1 said she would do so later, and he then asked her why she could not just sign or initial the request at that time. Complainant stated that S1 repeated she would do so later and that he needed to get back to work. At this point, Complainant stated that Postmaster (PM) asked him what was going on, and after explaining the situation, PM asked him whether S1 gave him instructions to get back to work. Complainant stated that he said yes, and then PM asked him whether he was refusing to do so. Complainant stated that he said he was not refusing to get back to work but wanted to understand why he was being held to policy and not S1. After leaving the office area, and while he was in the locker room, Complainant stated that PM walked in and asked him why he had not left yet. PM further questioned what Complainant was doing for the last hour, and when Complainant tried to explain, Complainant stated that PM interrupted him, yelled at him, and leaned over him in an attempt to intimidate him. After this exchange, and while Complainant was still in the locker room, Complainant stated that PM walked in again and told him he needed to deliver to the apartments that day. Complainant stated that he asked PM whether he needed to finish the apartments that day because it would put him over eight hours. Complainant stated PM then accused him of failing to follow instructions, refused his request for a union steward, demanded his badge, yelled at him to clean out his locker, and threatened to call the authorities to have him removed from the premises. In his affidavit, PM stated that he observed Complainant engaging in several time-wasting practices and was given instructions which he failed to follow. PM further stated that in alignment with Agency policy, Complainant was placed on Emergency Placement (EP) in an off- duty status without pay for failure to follow instructions. With respect to Complainant’s intimidation claim, PM stated that the claim was ridiculous, and since having COVID, he does not get close to any employee. PM also stated that a union steward was not available, and Complainant was told he could speak with his union steward, but he had to leave the facility immediately. In her affidavit, S1 confirmed that she asked Complainant around three times to deliver his route, but he did not listen to her. S1 stated that Complainant then became argumentative with PM. With respect to Complainant’s intimidation claim, S1 stated that she did not have any knowledge of what might have occurred in the men’s locker room. S1 further stated that no employee placed on EP was allowed to have a conversation with the union before leaving the premises. Complainant stated that his age was a factor when he was placed on EP because he was tasked with trying to complete an overburdened route within eight hours and was compared constantly to younger carriers. Complainant did not have any specific examples of similarly situated employees outside his protected class who were treated more favorably under similar circumstances. Claim 2 In his affidavit, Complainant stated that on September 14, 2022, after completing vehicle inspection and as he was loading his mail truck, S1 and his other supervisor, herein identified as S2, approached him and S2 demanded his badge. Complainant stated that S2 explained he was being walked out because he did not fasten his seatbelt before starting the vehicle and that he got out of the driver’s seat while the engine was running. Complainant stated that he then asked for a union steward but S2 denied his request. Complainant further stated that it was his understanding that Section 812. of Handbook M-41 specified that seatbelts were to be worn at all times the vehicle was in motion. The record reflects that Complainant was again placed on EP in an off-duty status without pay. While Complainant received a Notice of 14-Day Suspension Letter on September 22, 2022, the letter cites to incident(s) of failing to follow instructions on August 30, 2022, as the reason for Complainant’s suspension. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 00192-00193. In his affidavit, S2 stated that Complainant was observed exiting the mail truck and walking in front of it while the engine was running. S2 stated that this was a safety violation, and it was Agency policy for seatbelts to be worn at all times while operating a vehicle. S2 further stated that since Complainant was immediately placed on EP, he had to contact the union off postal property. In her affidavit, S1 stated that she had no knowledge of this incident since she was not present when it occurred. Complainant stated that he did not think his age factored into this incident and did not have any specific examples of similarly situated employees outside his protected class who were treated more favorably under similar circumstances. Claim 3 In his affidavit, Complainant stated that on September 20, 2022, S2 followed him into the bathroom two separate times and yelled at him. Complainant further stated that S2 threatened to discipline him. S2 denied raising his voice to Complainant, and stated that if he followed him, it was because of Complainant’s performance. S2 further stated that rather than washing up in the bathroom, Complainant was spending a long time in the locker room and doing something in his locker. Complainant stated that he believed his age was a factor when he was purportedly yelled at and threatened with discipline because now that he is older, he has to use the bathroom more often than he did when he was younger. Complainant did not have any specific examples of similarly situated employees outside his protected class who were treated more favorably under similar circumstances. Claim 4 In his affidavit, Complainant stated that on September 24, 2022, he started the engine of his mail truck and was fastening his seatbelt when S2 walked up to the passenger-side window and yelled at him for not fastening his seatbelt before he started the engine. Citing to Section 812. of Handbook M-41, Complainant stated that S2 improperly demanded that seatbelts are to be fastened before the engine is started as opposed to before the vehicle is shifted into gear and put into motion. Complainant further stated that S1 walked over to them and S2 asked her whether she saw anything wrong. Complainant stated that S1 said no and while S1 and S2 were talking to each other and making calls, he called the National Association of Letter Carriers (NALC) office. Complainant stated that someone from NALC confirmed his understanding of the Agency’s seatbelt policy, and when he asked the NALC officer to repeat what he said to S1 and S2, S1 told him it was not necessary, and he could go and deliver his route. Complainant stated that S1 also told him he had to follow all supervisor instructions and starting right then, he needed to fasten his seatbelt before he started the engine. S2 stated that he thought seatbelts needed to be fastened before starting a vehicle. S2 stated that he called safety and was told that it was not a written Agency policy. S2 further stated that he informed Complainant of this conversation and Complainant was then allowed to continue to his route. S1 confirmed that S2 called her over and asked whether she observed Complainant doing anything wrong. S1 stated that she did not, and ultimately told Complainant to follow the instructions of his supervisor. When asked if the requirement to fasten seatbelts before starting a vehicle applied to all employees going forward, S1 stated that she was not sure whether the request was sent to all carriers or if other carriers already fastened their seatbelts before starting their vehicles. S1 further stated that the relevant conversation was between S2 and Complainant. Complainant stated that he did not think his age factored into this incident and did not have any specific examples of similarly situated employees outside his protected class who were treated more favorably under similar circumstances. Claim 5 In his affidavit, Complainant stated that on November 1, 2022, he gave S1 a doctor’s note for 30 days of no overtime due to repetitive motion pain in his right shoulder. Complainant stated that S1 told him she did not need to honor his doctor’s note. Later that evening, Complainant returned with undelivered mail and clocked out. Complainant stated that S1 told him he needed to continue delivering the mail until he finished his route. Complainant stated that he reminded S1 of his doctor’s note and that he was unable to work overtime. Complainant stated that S1 asked him whether he was refusing to follow instructions. Complainant further stated that he told S1 he did not have to follow unsafe supervisor instructions, and ignoring his doctor’s note and demanding he work overtime did not seem safe to him. 2 Complainant stated that S1 then demanded his badge, and he was escorted off the premises. The record reflects that Complainant was again placed on EP in an off-duty status without pay, effective November 2, 2022. S1 stated that Complainant told her, based on union advice, that he could bring his mail back and he did not have to listen to management. S1 stated that she asked Complainant three times to finish his route, but Complainant kept reiterating what the union told him. S1 stated that, while the union could provide guidance, she told Complainant that he had to follow supervisor instruction. S1 further explained that she sent Complainant’s medical documentation to Occupational Health Management (OHM) for guidance, and OHM advised her that Complainant could finish his route that day. S1 stated that OHM advised her that they were looking into the matter and to wait for an update as to whether the doctor’s note needed to be honored as a limited duty job offer, or if it needed to be a light duty request that required submission to the PM for approval. Complainant stated that he believed his age was a factor when he was escorted off the premises because he was expected to finish an overburdened route, and now that he is older, he has noticed that he does not recover from pain and injuries as quickly as he did when he was younger. Complainant did not have any specific examples of similarly situated employees outside his protected class who were treated more favorably under similar circumstances. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Disability was not a basis raised in Complainant’s complaint. Complainant timely requested a hearing. When Complainant did not object, the AJ assigned to the case granted the Agency’s December 14, 2023, motion for a decision without a hearing and issued a decision without a hearing on January 4, 2024. The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination and harassment as alleged. The AJ found that the Agency's unrebutted facts served to establish nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. The AJ noted, for example, that Complainant argued with his supervisors, wasted time on his phone in the locker room, neglected to fasten his seatbelt, and failed to turn his vehicle off when exiting. The AJ found that these predicates, which Complainant did not dispute, provided sufficient nondiscriminatory justification for the discipline and other actions management meted out. The AJ found that Complainant did not offer evidence that management made biased comments about his age or that they treated younger workers more favorably. As a result, the AJ found that no reasonable factfinder, even viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Complainant, could conclude the Agency's actions were tainted by considerations of Complainant's age. The Agency subsequently issued a final order fully implementing the AJ’s decision. The instant appeal from Complainant followed.
