At the time of events giving rise to the complaints, Complainants worked as Emergency Management Specialists (Regional and National Tribal Government Liaisons) at the Agency’s First Responder Network Authority, working remotely from Pauma Valley, California and Thousand Palms, California. Complainants began their employment with the Agency in October 2015 at the Pay Band IV level. Starting on June 13, 2019, Complainants each filed formal EEO complaints alleging that the Agency subjected them to discrimination and harassment on the bases of race (Native American), national origin (Native American), and sex, 3 and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity, when: 1. Since Complainants were hired by the Agency, they have been subjected to discrimination in pay when: a. Complainant 1 engaged in salary negotiations with the Agency prior to being hired and was told that it was only obligated to offer him 70% of his previous wages, and he could “take it or leave it”; and he alleged that non-Natives were not subjected to the same treatment during the hiring process. Complainant 2 claimed that the Agency failed to account for changes in her prior salary or teaching wages and only offered a salary that was commensurate with her current tribal salary. b. Complainants performed the same work as peers who were hired at the Pay Band V level, but they were hired at the Pay Band IV and paid at the lowest level. c. In or around April 2018, the Executive Director, Public Safety Advocacy Directorate (“Executive Director”) directed Complainants’ supervisor (“Supervisor 1”) to conduct a review to address wage and pay band disparities, but the Executive Director and a Senior Director took no action after the review was completed and failed to acknowledge that it occurred. d. In a May 31, 2018 telephone conversation, the Senior Director claimed that he was unaware of the above-referenced review, but Complainants later learned from Supervisor 1 that the Senior Director was “very well aware” of it. e. On June 15, 2018, Complainants inquired with the Deputy Chief Administrative Officer about hiring and direct hiring authorities but were told that the Agency “does not have personnel policies and practices.” The Deputy Complainants withdrew their claims of sex discrimination during the hearing process. 3 [number removed], [number removed] Chief Administrative Officer also failed to apprise Complainants of their right to pursue the EEO process to address their allegations of discriminatory pay. f. In or around July 2018, Complainants’ new supervisor (“Supervisor 2”) inquired with the Executive Director and Senior Director about the April 2018 review, but they denied any knowledge of committing to the review. g. In January 2019, the Executive Director acknowledged to Supervisor 2 that he had received the review but asserted that he felt no obligation to act on it. The Executive Director then instructed Supervisor 2 to “tamper any escalation of [human resources (HR)] issues for the tribal team,” but then backpaddled in a subsequent email and claimed that Supervisor 2 misunderstood his instructions. 4 2. Complainants were precluded from applying to senior leadership positions due to the discriminatory setting of their pay at the Pay Band IV level when the Agency made senior leadership positions available only to Pay Band V employees. 3. In June 2018, Complainants were “buried deeper” in the organization through a reorganization process, in an effort to provoke Complainants to quit their jobs and as a means to “limit any HR escalations from [the] tribal team”. 4. On an ongoing basis since at least June 2018, Complainants were tasked with creating separate strategic plans, while none of their non-Tribal team peers were required to do the same. 5. On multiple occasions between June 2018 and February 2019, Complainants and other Agency officials repeatedly apprised senior leadership that they (Tribal team members) were being subjected to hostile and discriminatory treatment by officials of an Agency contractor. However, senior leadership condoned the contractors’ treatment and continued to place the team in hostile situations with contracting officials. 6. On an ongoing basis, Complainants have been denied equal access to resources to perform their duties in the same manner as their peers when: a. Complainants were forced to coordinate all their activities through a separate, discriminatory process to access resources and their non-federal shareholders. We note that the Agency accepted claim 1 with subparts (a) though (g), as outlined above. However, one of the AJs did not include the subparts in the Case Management Order. Instead, the AJ noted a consolidation of the subparts and that claim 1 included the allegation that management officials took no remedial action after reviewing wage and pay band disparities. As such, we find that subparts 1(c) though 1(g) fall under that allegation. 4 [number removed], [number removed] b. Complainants have been forced to engage with the contracting staff and Tribal shareholders through a “gatekeeper.” c. The Agency limited the types of meetings Complainants were allowed to participate in. d. An Agency Contracting Officer’s Representative was required to participate in daily engagements between contractors and Complainants. 7. On May 5, 2019, the Agency failed to acknowledge Complainants and other Tribal team members’ accomplishments when issuing a tweet which thanked local, state, and federal workers for their dedication and service, but did not reference the Tribal team. At the conclusion of the investigations, Complainants were provided copies of the investigative files, and they requested hearings before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). The two complaints were assigned to different AJs in the Commission’s Washington Field Office. Complainants’ shared attorney filed motions to consolidate the complaints for joint processing before each AJ. The Agency opposed the motions. One AJ denied the motion and the other AJ did not address the motion. The AJs issued separate summary judgment decisions finding no discrimination or unlawful retaliation was established. The Agency’s final actions implemented the AJs’ decisions. The instant appeals from both Complainants followed.
