At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a probationary Credentials Assistant, GS-0303-07, at the Agency’s Naval Medical Center in Portsmouth, Virginia. On November 8, 2018, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against her based on race (African-American) when she was terminated from her probationary position on August 2, 2018. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant requested a hearing. The AJ held a hearing and subsequently issued a decision in favor of the Agency. The AJ first determined that Complainant’s theory of discrimination based on direct evidence was unreliable and found that neither Complainant nor her supporting witness were credible. At the hearing, Complainant testified that her second-level supervisor (S2), Department Head, GS- 0301-12, “made the decision to terminate her after learning that her ‘significant other’ was [W]hite.” Complainant testified that S2 became aware of Complainant’s relationship with a White man in May 2018, and that her relationship with S2 changed afterward. She also testified that her first-level supervisor (S1), Professional Affairs Coordinator (Assistant Department Head), GS-0301-11, “had warned [Complainant] not to let [S2] know she was dating a [W]hite man.” To corroborate her theory that S2 discriminated against her based on her race, Complainant presented a key witness, a coworker (CW), Program Analyst, GS-0303-07, who “testified that [S2] openly stated that [S2’s] husband was extremely biased against interracial relationships, and that she was surprised Complainant was dating a [W]hite man. [CW] claims she heard [S2] make other race-related remarks.” Both Complainant and CW testified that S1 had warned them about S2’s prejudice. 2 The AJ found this testimony lacked credibility “due to the glaring omission of any theory about Complainant’s interracial relationship in her complaint, EEO counseling records, or her affidavit [during the investigation].” The AJ reasoned that “[t]his type of evidence, if credible, would not have come up for the first time some three years after her termination.” During EEO counseling and in her affidavit, Complainant explained that she believed her termination stemmed from events that occurred during a work conference in Leesburg, Virginia, where S2 allegedly engaged in inappropriate behavior, and Complainant believed that S2 “did not trust [her] to not share what happened.” Complainant also had indicated that her termination was related to the fact that S2 thought Complainant had filed a grievance against her, though it had been another employee. The AJ noted that these prior theories Complainant posited before the hearing about why S2 terminated her “have no apparent connection to her race.” When cross-examined by Agency counsel during the hearing about the fact that she had not previously raised the theory of S2’s prejudice against interracial couples, Complainant provided no explanation for why she had not included it. Similarly, the AJ found that any reference to S2’s prejudice against interracial relationships was “conspicuously missing from [CW’s] affidavit” submitted during the investigation. CW’s affidavit referenced the events at the training in Leesburg and that she believed “Complainant was discriminated against because she was an African-American with more experience than management.” CW also stated in her affidavit that S1 had made racially inappropriate remarks but nowhere mentioned anything about Complainant’s partner being White or S2’s opposition to it. S1 testified during the hearing and denied making any comments about S2 being racist. The AJ found that the Agency articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Complainant’s termination. The reason, according to the Notice of Termination letter, was Complainant’s failure to “follow the privileging/credentialing process when [she] misrepresented to [her] leadership that a provider had specifically requested privileges when in fact [Complainant] made the request. According to the provider, [Complainant was] the one who tried to convince him to apply for privileges he did not previously hold.” This incident relates to a credentialing/privileges application submitted by the provider that Complainant helped process. In the application, the provider selected the incorrect privileges, which he had selected based on Complainant’s mistaken belief about the proper protocol for credentialing contract providers. Complainant’s guidance to the provider, which she acknowledged at the time was inaccurate, delayed the provider’s application and prevented him from receiving the proper credentials needed to practice within the Agency until the day his then-current privileges were set to expire. The provider then contacted Complainant’s supervisors “to express frustration with the delay in his application . . . [because Complainant] had provided him with incorrect guidance.” When her supervisors asked about the incident, Complainant explained to S1 that, before the provider’s discussion with Complainant, she had received an application from him within which he had improperly requested the incorrect privileges that he did not previously hold, and that her mistaken guidance was based on this prior application. After S2 obtained a written statement from the provider, S2 concluded that Complainant had misrepresented what happened, which provided part of the basis for Complainant’s termination. 3 The provider was a witness at the hearing, and the AJ found him credible when he testified that “he and Complainant discussed the [privileges] application before he submitted it” and that he submitted his application based on her instructions. The AJ found Complainant “not credible in her testimony that she never spoke to [the provider] prior to him submitting the [first] application.” The AJ therefore concluded that “Complainant has failed to prove pretext because there is no evidence that” the similarly situated employee named by Complainant “was involved in a similar episode, or that she was dishonest with her managers.” The AJ found Complainant’s testimony “simply unreliable” and that her “credibility is doubly important in this case because her lack of candor was part of why she was terminated.” The AJ therefore found that the Agency had not discriminated against Complainant as alleged. Part of Complainant’s Notice of Termination also included that Complainant “failed to initiate the renewal privileging/credentialing process within 90 days as required.” The AJ found, however, that it was untrue Complainant failed to do this, and that a similarly situated employee had several renewals nearing expiration with less than 90 days remaining but was not terminated. The AJ found that “[i]f this were the only reason for Complainant’s termination, she would be able to demonstrate pretext. But it was not.” When the Agency failed to issue a final order within forty days of receipt of the AJ’s decision, the AJ’s decision finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected her to discrimination as alleged became the Agency’s final action pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.109(i). 4 The instant appeal followed.
