During the period at issue, Complainant was employed by the Agency as a Mail Handler (Modified Assignment - Limited Duty), PS 4/P, at the Church Street Station in New York, New York. lumbosacral sprain) when, from July 5, 2019 through July 31, 2019, 2 it did not allow her to work. The Agency accepted the complaint for investigation. The following pertinent information was found. On June 15, 2019, the American Postal Workers Union, AFL-CIO, filed a Step 2 grievance against the Agency alleging that Complainant performing Clerk Craft duties in her Modified Assignment violated the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between the union and the Agency because this crossed crafts (i.e. someone outside the Clerk Craft performing Clerk Craft duties). Report of Investigation (ROI), Exhs. 4 (Step 2 grievance), 7 (Union request for a list of Complainant’s Modified Assignment duties), and Affidavit C, at 3, ¶ 15 (by the Manager of Customer Services, Complainant’s second line supervisor “S2”), Bates Nos. 180, 207, 146. Complainant does not contest that she performed Clerk Craft duties. On June 11, 2019, the Agency Health & Resource Management (HRM) informed Complainant that her most recent medical note on file was dated January 18, 2011, and it asked her to submit an updated note from her doctor with her medical restrictions. The request was repeated on June 21, 2019. ROI, at Affidavit A, at 16, Bates No. 21. S2 separately stated this request was made so the Agency could draft a new Offer of Modified Assignment for Complainant that was within her current medical restrictions and did not cross crafts. ROI, Affidavit C, at 3, ¶ 15, Bates No. 146. The Supervisor of Customer Services, Complainant’s first line supervisor “S1” echoed this. Affidavit B, at 3, ¶ 15, Bates No. 138. However, Complainant refused to submit a doctor’s note with her current medical restrictions, believing it was unnecessary. At some point, S2 told Complainant not to return to work until she submitted an updated doctor’s note describing her medical restrictions. Affidavit A, at 3, ¶ 15, at Bates No. 92 (Complainant’s affidavit). Complainant expected that when she brought in the updated note, she would be allowed to work. On July 5, 2019, Complainant came to work with a July 2, 2019 doctor’s letter which read: … Above mentioned patient physical requirements are lifting, pushing/pulling reaching above shoulder not to exceed 20lbs [sic.], standing and walking average time 20 minutes…. According to S2, HRM found the updated doctor’s letter to be inadequate because the limitations were unclear. S2 stated that he asked Complainant to submit another updated doctor’s letter. Without reference to HRM, S1 attested that S2 told him the above. Complainant submitted a revised doctor’s note after July 31, 2019. ROI, Affidavit C, at four, ¶ 15 as continued from prior page, Bates No. 147. She returned to work on August 1, 2019. Complainant erroneously alleged this period started on July 4, 2019, which was a paid holiday for her. The HRM Manager stated it was S2 who decided not allow Complainant to work. According to HRM Manager, he learned this after S2 made the decision and he was not aware why Complainant was not allowed to work in her limited duty assignment between July 5, 2019 and July 31, 2019. On July 22, 2019, the HRM Manager wrote Complainant that the Agency was reviewing her Modified Assignment (Limited Duty) to determine if a revision was necessary after an arbitration award on limited duty “non-APWU Clerk craft employees performing clerk craft duty assignments.” He informed Complainant that management would perform a search for adequate, available work and, if found, she would be offered a revised Modified Assignment (Limited Duty) within her July 2, 2019 medical restrictions. Days later, in a letter dated July 25, 2019, the HRM Manager presented Complainant an Offer of Modified Assignment (Limited duty) effective August 1, 2019, to the position of Modified Handler (Modified Assignment – indefinite duration) at the James A. Farley Retail Local Operation Center. ROI, Bates Nos. 25 -26. The duties differed from her prior assignment, and the letter noted these duties were within the restrictions set forth in her “treating doctor [letter] dated July 2, 2019.” The list of Complainant’s restrictions in the Offer are identical to those listed in her July 2, 2019 doctor’s letter. ROI, Ex. 8, at 2, Bates No. 199. Following the investigation, Complainant requested a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). When Complainant later withdrew the request, the AJ ordered the Agency to issue a FAD. In its FAD the Agency found no discrimination. In its decision, the Agency assumed, without finding, that Complainant was an individual with a disability. The Agency found she was not qualified because she was unable to perform the essential functions of her Mail Handler (unmodified) job with, or without, reasonable accommodation. But, even presuming she was otherwise qualified, the Agency reasoned that Complainant did not submit the medical documentation management requested in order to offer her a new modified assignment within her medical limitations. Additionally, the Agency concluded Complainant did not prove discrimination under the theory of disparate treatment. It found, for example, that Complainant did not identify any comparative employees who were treated differently. The instant appeal followed. On appeal, Complainant argues that she was discriminated against. 3 In reply, the Agency argues that the FAD should be affirmed. Complainant raises allegations on appeal which are not part of her EEO complaint presently before us. Consequently, we shall not consider such claims in the instant decision.
