During the relevant time, Complainant worked as an Aircraft Mechanic at the Agency’s Aircraft Maintenance Squadron facility in Robins Air Force Base, Georgia. At the time of the event in this claim, Aircraft Overhaul Supervisor (Supervisor) was his first-level supervisor. Report of Investigation (ROI) at 161-62. Production Team Lead (Team Lead) was his second-level supervisor. ROI at 169. On May 25, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency subjected him to a hostile work environment on the bases of race (African-American), color (Black), and age (52) when, on December 11, 2020, Supervisor refused to render first aide to Complainant for a bleeding head wound and verbally assaulted Complainant when he screamed to Complainant, "Get your ass back on the plane, you do not do shit every day, I want you off my fucking team immediately, and I am tired of your shit.” At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. On January 21, 2022, the AJ issued a Notice of Proposed Summary Judgment (Notice) and provided each of the parties an opportunity to respond. In the Notice, the AJ outlined the relevant facts of the case. The AJ indicated that Complainant had an accident that caused him to bleed from his head. While looking for the band-aid, Supervisor observed Complainant away from his work area and began to yell at Complainant, including the statement outlined above. The AJ noted that Complainant conceded that he did not believe that this was based on age or race. However, Complainant added that Supervisor treated him differently due to his protected classes due to past unspecified incidents, but Complainant did not approach Supervisor about the past incidents. Supervisor did not deny yelling at Complainant but said that he had numerous performance concerns with Complainant. After the incident, Complainant contacted Team Lead and another Agency official about the incident. Supervisor was suspended without pay for 10 days, reassigned to day shift, and precluded from supervising anyone for 90 days. Supervisor’s role as Complainant’s supervisor ended immediately after the incident. ROI at 162. The AJ found that Supervisor’s behavior was unprofessional and unacceptable but did not rise to the level of harassment. The AJ noted that this was a single incident where Supervisor lost his temper using facially neutral language. Even when considering the background allegations, the AJ found that the totality of the circumstances did not reveal a work environment permeated with hostility nor does the cursing demonstrate sufficient severity. Therefore, the AJ indicated the intent to issue a decision without a hearing finding in favor of the Agency. Both parties were offered the opportunity to respond to the Notice. Complainant provided his stipulations of fact which included, for the first time, additional allegations in support of his claim. Complainant stated without providing supporting evidence that Supervisor has a history of hatred towards him and of mistreatment of other African-Americans at work. Complainant asserted for the first time that Supervisor made comments about President Obama and displayed images of the confederate flag in the hangar. The Agency did not provide a response by the deadline to the Notice but did produce the suspension paperwork of Supervisor to the AJ. Over Complainant's objections, the AJ issued a decision without a hearing on February 25, 2022. The AJ incorporated the Notice. The AJ also noted that Complainant initially reported that he believed that the incident was not due to his race or his age. In addition, the AJ indicated that the background allegations were never included in the EEO Counselor Report, the formal complaint, or Complainant’s affidavit. Given the totality of the circumstances, the AJ found that Complainant did not prove he was discriminated against as alleged. The Agency subsequently issued a final order adopting the AJ’s finding that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed. Complainant contends that he was “humiliated, intimidated, bullied and exposed to racist comments and treatment by [Supervisor].” He alleges that he provided the investigators a list of incidents that were racially motivated and he provided a list of witnesses to these events. He says that allegations of racial, age or color discrimination were made several times prior to summary judgment. Finally, Complainant claims that the Agency has withheld “vital information” about Supervisor and summary judgment denied him the opportunity to obtain this information which, Complainant asserts, “will prove a history of racial discrimination [of Supervisor] towards African Americans.” In response, the Agency argues that the AJ’s summary judgment was proper and should stand.
