Complainant was employed by the Agency as a Legal Assistant (Court), GS-0986-08, at the Orlando Immigration Court in Orlando, Florida. on his race (African-American), sex (male), and reprisal (prior protected EEO activity under Title VII, the ADEA, and the Rehabilitation Act) when on October 22, 2015: • He got a mid-year review by his first line supervisor (“S1” – Hispanic, female, Supervisory Legal Assistant) that negatively and falsely characterized his professionalism and customer service with a list of untrue and twisted distortions; and • He was not permitted to give evidence refuting the mid-year review. On November 5, 2015, Complainant filed EEO complaint EOI-2016-00061 (“Complaint 2”) alleging he was subjected to discrimination and a hostile work environment on the above bases and age (49) when on October 22, 2015: • He got his mid-year review in a conference room rather than in S1’s office; • His second line supervisor (“S2” – Caucasian, male, Court Administrator) was present in the conference room. Following separate EEO investigations on Complaints 1 and 2, Complainant requested a hearing on each before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ), and they were later joined. The Agency filed a motion for summary judgement, which Complainant opposed. The AJ granted the motion and found no discrimination without a hearing, and the Agency adopted this decision in its final order. The instant appeal followed the AJ’s decision. In the mid-term review, S1 assessed Complainant’s performance as “at a successful level or higher.” Complainant contended he unfairly did not receive a rating of Excellent or Outstanding. The AJ found it uncontroverted that EOIR employees do not receive a rating of record at their mid-year review. In the narrative portion of Complainant’s mid-year review, S1 wrote for the critical performance element of “Customer Service” that he needed to communicate with attorneys and return telephone calls, for the critical performance element of “Establish, Update, Maintain and Process Record of Proceedings and Case Records” he needed to keep up with motions – not hold them, and not sign nor let orders sit overnight on his desk, and for the critical element of “Legal and Technical Support” he needed to be a team player by limiting his cell phone and internet usage. S1 also wrote that Complainant should continue his hard work and continue to strive for excellence. The AJ found that Complainant only contested the assessment of his Customer Service. In support his claim that the mid-year review was falsely critical, Complainant pointed to a September 2015 letter by a defendant to an immigration judge complimenting her handling of his case for nearly five years, and expressing, without a name, his “thankfulness… to your direct assistant, who was always very friendly and correct in handling my affairs.” Complainant started assisting this judge in June 2014, when he was hired by EOIR. He alleged that on October 22, 2015, S2 refused to accept this letter, explaining it “failed… as creditable” evidence. Report of Investigation (ROI) Complaint 1, Bates No. 10 (EEO complaint) and Bates Nos. 90 – 91, at ¶¶ 24 – 27 (Complainant’s affidavit). The AJ found assuming Complainant tried to submit this letter, it would not have changed his rating since none is given at the mid-year review, nor refuted he needed to better communicate with attorneys and return telephone calls since it only concerned his interaction with a defendant in court. Mid-year reviews are typically given in a first line supervisor’s office. Complainant’s mid-year review was in a lower conference room away from his peers and others, giving privacy. Complainant acknowledged the conference room gave privacy. The AJ found that management choose the conference room to assure privacy, not to harass or discriminate. Typically, mid-year reviews are given with only the evaluator (S1) and person receiving it present. The AJ found that S2 was present because he had a responsibility to closely monitor things between Complainant and S1 since Complainant’s misconduct with S1 was abusive and caustic, and his disciplinary issues. In his rebuttal investigatory affidavit, made after reviewing S1, S2, and a third management official’s affidavits, Complainant countered these affidavits had lies and inconsistent statements. The AJ found this did not rebut S1 and S2’s explanations for why S2 was present at the mid-year review. 2 On appeal, Complainant argues that S2 admitted treating him differently. He cites portions of S2’s investigatory affidavit that acknowledges reviews are normally done in the evaluator’s office with only the evaluator (S1) and person being evaluated present, and Complainant got different treatment on these things. Complainant “respectfully questions” whether there can be equal justice where Agency counsel and the AJ are white. He argues there are genuine issues of material fact entitling him to a hearing, citing, for example, S2’s admission that he was treated differently. In reply, the Agency argues its final order should be affirmed.
