At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as a City Carrier Technician, A-02/Q, at the Agency’s Village Station in New York, New York. 1. Since June 26, 2016, and continuing, management has assigned Complainant work outside of her medical restrictions and failed to pay her properly and/or on time; 2. On October 4, 2016, and other unspecified dates, her clock rings were deleted; and 3. On unspecified dates, Complainant’s request to be detailed as a 204-B has not been granted. 2 Complainant was employed as a City Carrier Technician, assigned to the Village Station. Report of Investigation, Affidavit A at 190, Exhibit 1. The duties of a Carrier Technician were to case and deliver mail for several carrier routes. The duties include pushing, lifting, simple grasping daily for eight hours a day. ROI, Affidavit C2. Complainant attributes her medical conditions to a recurrence of an on-the-job injury. She was first diagnosed on May 10, 2014, which is noted in the record by her physician as the date of the injury. ROI at 64-65. She averred that her medical conditions are a back sprain, displacement of lumbar intervertebral disc without myelopathy, and a hernia, which she had repaired after the on- the-job injury. ROI, Complainant’s Affidavit, at 191. Complainant’s medical restrictions include sitting three hours, walking limited to 30 minutes, standing 10 minutes, avoiding reaching above the shoulder, twisting, bending, stooping, pushing, pulling, lifting, squatting, kneeling, and climbing. She also required 15-minute breaks every hour. ROI at 191. She had been out on leave for an extended period. When she returned, she was assigned to the Lenox Hill Station. On June 22, 2016, an offer was made to Complainant for a limited duty modified assignment to work at the Lenox Hill South Station from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. The position was not a vacant, funded position. The position involved shuttling carriers by van to and from their routes and delivering express mail under five pounds for up to four hours a day and up to 30 minutes respectively. On paper, this met Complainant’s restrictions. Complainant signed the modified job offer on July 1, 2016, and she began the assignment on or about July 18, 2016. ROI at 196, 233. Although Complainant felt the modified job assignment would be too much for her, she told her Manager that she would try it, and let him know if she was unable to handle it, and he agreed. ROI at 196. The Manager testified that he became aware of the Complainant’s medical condition through the job offer. He denied receiving, or having, any medical documentation for Complainant. The Agency dismissed an additional claim for failure to state a claim. Complainant raised no challenges regarding this matter and the Commission can find no basis to disturb the Agency’s dismissal decision. The record shows that Complainant had been offered another light duty job, to serve as a lobby attendant. Complainant declined the lobby attendant position. Complainant believed it would be beyond what she could do, given her restrictions. The undisputed record shows that the Manager gave her instructions to make an express delivery, which he believed conformed to her medical restrictions. ROI at 196. Complainant claimed that, on August 29, 2016, she walked an hour (with breaks), even though she was not supposed to walk more than 30 minutes. She was not permitted the use of the van. Using the van, as indicated in the modified job offer, would require her to stoop and twist to get in the vehicle. Even picking up an envelope that dropped on the ground would be a violation of her restrictions to avoid stooping. ROI at 196. The record shows that Complainant was out on leave for significant periods of time in July and August 2016. Some of Complainant’s clock rings had been deleted for the dates July 18, 2016, through July 28, 2016, and her time was coded as full workers’ compensation. Complainant had just started working at the Lenox Hill Station and the receiving station should have entered her time. ROI, Affidavit A. The Manager averred that Complainant had an incorrect leave code in the system. ROI, Affidavit B. She did not return to work until October 4, 2016, to fill out workers’ compensation paperwork and again on November 14, 2016, to fill out additional paperwork. As further background, Complainant had recently come back from being on full time workers’ compensation. Because Complainant switched from one facility to another – from Village Station to Lenox Hill, there is insufficient evidence that the supervisor at the receiving facility realized she had returned to work from being out on workers’ compensation. Complainant asserted that her Manager’s poor organization was another reason for the errors that were made. ROI at 197-198 (209-210). The deletion of the clock rings was discovered before her EEO filing that is the subject of this appeal. Meanwhile, on September 14, 2016, she filed a grievance regarding the payment failures and the deleted clock rings. The Agency maintained that the payment failures were due to plain error. 3 In addition, Complainant averred that she requested to serve as an acting supervisor (204B) over the carriers. On or about November 14, 2016, the Manager did not offer her a 204B detail as a reasonable accommodation. The Manager averred he did not need any acting supervisors for his operations. In addition, he averred that he believed that supervisors must be punctual and reliable, which were attributes that he did not observe in Complainant. ROI, Affidavit B. In addition, the record shows that manual timecards had been submitted and lost. Complainant cited the errors that had been made and believed they may have been caused by the Agency not having a disk which would have allowed Complainant to log her hours automatically, rather than manually. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of her right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge (AJ). Complainant timely requested a hearing. The AJ assigned to the case issued a summary judgment decision in favor of the Agency finding that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. In the decision, the AJ found that Complainant was not denied reasonable accommodation as alleged in claim (1). The AJ determined that Complainant was provided a modified limited duty assignment of shuttling carriers in a van and delivering express mail which was within her documented medical restrictions. Complainant believed that the job was too much for her. The Agency offered Complainant another modified assignment of lobby attendant, but she declined the position. The AJ noted that Complainant claimed another modified assignment that was offered and rescinded would have met her needs, but that position contained similar tasks as the lobby attendant position that she declined. The AJ determined that there was no evidence that Complainant was forced to work outside of her medical restrictions. Thus, Complainant appeared to have been unable to perform her job with or without a reasonable accommodation as her medical restrictions were so severe. Therefore, the AJ found that Complainant was not denied reasonable accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. With respect to the remaining issues, the AJ determined that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. More specifically, with respect to her claims that she was not paid properly and her clock rings were deleted, Agency officials explained that errors occurred for a number or reasons. For example, Complainant returned to full-time duty from workers’ compensation so supervisors at the other facility may not have realized she had returned to work. In addition, Complainant switched from one facility to another. Another reason was because manual timecards were submitted and lost instead of digital submission which would have prevented the issue. Finally, Complainant herself noted that the Manager had poor organizational skills which contributed to the errors. As to her claim that her request to be detailed as a 204-B acting supervisor was not granted, Complainant claimed that the Manager and another manager “brushed her off” and that she mentioned the detail as a way for her to be accommodated. The Manager offered her the two above-discussed positions as accommodations. Complainant stated that instead of training her for a 204-B position, she was told she could apply for a city-wide position that would take time to obtain. The AJ determined that Complainant wanted a manager to promote her on the spot rather than actually applying for the detail assignment. The AJ found that Complainant failed to show that the denial of the detail was a result of discriminatory or retaliatory animus. The AJ concluded that Complainant failed to show that the Agency’s reasons for its actions were pretextual. As a result, the AJ found that Complainant was not subjected to discrimination or reprisal as alleged. The Agency subsequently issued a final order fully adopting the AJ’s decision. This appeal followed.
