At the time of events giving rise to this complaint, Complainant worked as an Administrative Technician, GS-0303-05, at the Agency’s Chicago Regional Office in Oak Brook, Illinois. On August 24, 2021, Complainant filed an EEO complaint alleging that the Agency discriminated against him based on disability (diabetes and liver fibrosis) and in reprisal for prior protected EEO activity (requesting a reasonable accommodation) when he was terminated, effective July 28, 2021. Complainant does not challenge the framing of the complaint. At the conclusion of the investigation, the Agency provided Complainant with a copy of the report of investigation and notice of his right to request a hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge. In accordance with Complainant’s request, the Agency issued a final decision pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.110(b). The decision concluded that Complainant failed to prove that the Agency subjected him to discrimination as alleged. The instant appeal followed. In its final decision, the Agency found that Complainant was an individual with a disability and that he was qualified within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act. Assuming Complainant established a prima facie case of discrimination and retaliation, the Agency concluded that the Agency articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons that Complainant failed to rebut as pretextual. Complainant began his employment with the Agency on January 17, 2021, with a Competitive- Career Conditional Appointment, which required him to be a probationary employee for one year. He had previously worked for the Agency as an Administrative Manager (Excepted Service Appointment) during the decennial census. In a progress review dated June 15, 2021, the person listed as Complainant’s first-level supervisor stated that Complainant was not performing at the fully successful level 3 or above and listed areas for improvement, including becoming familiarized with the onboarding and payroll processes and timely completion of assignments. In three emails from June 2021, S3 (third level supervisor, Program Coordinator) emailed Complainant regarding some performance issues, including partial or missing pay for two employees in Complainant’s service area, the payroll processing for pay period 11 of that year, and the status of several new hires. S3 also issued Complainant a memorandum on June 17, 2021, titled “Failure to Follow Up on Payroll Issues,” outlining his performance deficiencies. Another of Complainant’s first-level supervisors (S1), Administrative Officer, stated in her affidavit that Complainant had errors and issues with his work that caused several people not to receive their pay on time, which resulted in new hires resigning. S1, who became Complainant’s supervisor in early July 2021, retrained the staff upon learning of these errors. S1 stated that even after retraining, Complainant “continued to have unresolved pay issues for the new hires he was responsible for.” S3 issued Complainant a termination letter on July 28, 2021, citing his unacceptable performance during his probationary period. The letter stated that he had failed to ensure timely onboarding of new hires and tracking them through the hiring process. In addition, the letter stated he failed to successfully process payroll in a timely matter. Another supervisor, Administrative Specialist (AS), said she supervised Complainant until his termination, though her affidavit indicated that she supervised and assigned Complainant tasks related to the Census Investigative Service Missing Documents Project as opposed to payroll/timekeeping. AS claims that she did not observe any unacceptable job performance issues concerning Complainant and that no such issues were brought to her attention regarding his involvement in the Missing Documents Project. AS averred that she believed Complainant was terminated based on his disabilities and for requesting a reasonable accommodation based on her observation of “tension between the Complainant and [S3] regarding his work schedule.” The Agency found that management’s legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for terminating Complainant during his probationary period were based on his performance issues in processing payroll and new hire onboarding, which he often failed to complete without errors or on time. In addressing the question of whether Complainant established pretext, the Agency noted AS’s affidavit, where she stated she did not observe any performance problems by Complainant while under her supervision. The Agency determined that AS only supervised one aspect of Complainant’s work, the Missing Documents Project, not timekeeping and processing of new hires. Because three of Complainant’s supervisors confirmed his deficiencies in those areas, the Agency found that AS’s statements did not cast doubt on the Agency’s explanation. The Agency also reasoned that there was no evidence that S3 voiced opposition to Complainant’s reasonable accommodation or his telework schedule, especially given that all of the Administrative Technicians she supervised teleworked two days per week for at least a portion of the period at issue. The Agency therefore concluded Complainant could not show management’s reasons were pretext for discrimination or reprisal, beyond Complainant’s subjective belief.
